With Memories of '71
2014-02-07T00:00:27+06:00 | Fayza Haq
https://www.thedailystar.net/with-memories-of-71-10041

Krishana Dey Chattopadhay, from Barisal, was 13 years old in 1971. Her memory of the Liberation War, is therefore quite vivid and filled with painful as well as proud moments. It is perhaps the intense moments during that volatile time that has influenced the bold, emotional strokes of her art that often depict figures of men and women. Her paintings are varied – some are semi-impressionist, others are impressionistic and still others are just lines and dots. But there is always a latent sensuality and vitality in her images, bodies bursting with life, energy and intensity. Starting with painting mainly, Krishna, has delved into print in her later works. Her sketch of a male face with tiny blocks of people was done in 2007. It is called 'Inner vision' or 'Antar Drishti'. Other powerful images include 'Birangona'(2007) – voluptuous women surrounded by greedy monsters with sharp, protruded teeth; and 'Radha Krishna'(2011) that depict the idyllic romance of Indian mythology. In 'Man –personified' (2013) that shows three men in three colours – black, white and gray, the artist hints at the various sides to a man's personality. Meanwhile 'Woman'(2013) is done in burnt sienna and depicts the typical waiting woman in a gray sari. In the background there is vermilion, a black rectangle , triangle and dots. Krishna started drawing and painting as a child. Her father was a free lance artist from the Kolkata Art College. He was a freedom fighter during the British Raj and involved in the Swadeshi Movement of 1930. As was the tradition of the colonial times he spoke English fluently and played the piano, sarangi and esraz, informs his daughter proudly. At the end of the Ayub Era, in 1969, in the villages, Hindus were being persecuted and as a result, Krishna's family left Bikrampur and fled to Barisal town. When they returned to Bikrampur after the war, the house, roof and hedge were destroyed, everything had been looted. Even the ground had been dug up for possible hidden treasure. The family still lived in fear and the two young girls of the family, Krishna and her sister Madhobi, were sent to India, to safety. Krishna recalls the gruelling journey – some of the way they walked, sometimes they went on boat and sometimes they were lucky to find a rickshaw. The two young women stayed at an uncle's house, but were soon considered burdens: the war was on and they were unwanted guests. Krishna went to Shanthi Sibir, and stayed there for a few days, helping to nurse the sick back to health. Later she went to help the wounded Muktijoddhas. She supplied not only medicines, but also blankets, to keep away the chill. Before the end of the war of 1971, in October she went to Kolkata. She wanted to study at the Kolkata Art College, but she did not get the support. She stayed for four years at her younger uncle's house. In 1972, Krishna passed her SSC and joined the Dhaka Art College. In 1988 , she did her masters in Painting. In 1971, the Pak Army had taken away her only brother Jagarnath Dey with the intention of killing him. But when the hostile major learnt that he was an artist, they released him as he was not a Muktijoddha. He was asked to make portraits of the Army personnel and it was the only way he could remain alive. At present, Krishna is furiously working for an upcoming exhibition. This will include pen sketches, mixed media, acrylic, water-colour and oil. She is also preoccupied with etching, dry-point, lino and woodcut.
