Remembering a Martyr
2014-02-07T00:00:40+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/remembering-a-martyr-10046

January 20 is the 44th death anniversary of Amanullah Mohammad Asaduzzaman (10 June 1942 – 20 January 1969). Asad was a student activist and stood strongly against the dictatorial regime of Ayub Khan. He was killed by the police during a protest on January 20, 1969 which turned  the protest into a mass upheaval. He was one of the three martyrs of the 1969 uprising in East Pakistan which set the stage for the liberation war.

Study and Politics * Asad was admitted to Dhaka University in 1963 as a student of Bachelor of Arts. * He passed a Master of Arts course from the same university in 1967 * He also passed the Law course with outstanding results * From the very beginning of his university life he was an active member of the East Pakistan Students Union. * He was the President of the Dhaka Hall Unit of East Pakistan Students Union (Menon Group) * He was also the General Secretary of the Dhaka branch of that organisation

Politics for People * In his political activities, Asaduzzaman was interested in the educational rights of the poor and powerless * He founded a night school named Shibpur Naisha Biddalaya where underpriviledged children were educated free of cost * He collected funds for setting up a college (Shibpur College) for local people * he organised the Krishak Samity in Shibpur, Monohardi, Raipura and Narsingdi areas at the direction of Maulana * * Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani, President of National Awami Party

The Final Procession * Asad was a strong supporter of Shiekh Mujib's six point movement and strongly protested the Agartala conspiracy case against Mujib * He organised many processions of agitated students protesting the vile conspiracy against Bangabandhu and the Bengalis * On January 20 the then Governor Monem Khan imposed section 144 banning assembly of no more than four persons * Asad continued with his procession from Dhaka Medical College towards Chan Khar Pool. * At that time he was shot at point blank range by a police officer and embraced martyrdom

The Glorious Aftermath ! Asad's death turned the procession into a mass upheaval ! Due to the mass upheaval of 1969 Ayub Khan was forced to resign ! Ayub Khan also withdrew all cases against Sheikh Mujibur Rahman ! Mass upheaval of 1969 paved the way for the liberation of Bangladesh
