Know real history of Liberation War
2016-03-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Bss, Tungipara, Gopalganj
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/know-real-history-liberation-war-1043500

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday called upon children to know the real history of the 1971 Liberation War and the long struggle for the country's independence.

She also urged them to follow the ideals of Bangabandhu to become "good citizens".

"After the assassination of Bangabandhu in 1975, the spirit of the Liberation War was undermined and the people of the country were deprived of knowing the true history of independence for 21 years,” she said.

But, the PM said, days have changed today. "The children of the country now know the true history of the Liberation War as we after coming to power again are projecting it before them."

She said, "We want that children would develop themselves with such a mindset that they would know that we are a victorious nation and Bangabandhu gave us the flag of that victory."

Hasina was addressing a children's rally marking the 97th birthday of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu and National Children's Day at Bangabandhu Mausoleum Complex at Tungipara in Gopalganj.

The Ministry of Women and Children Affairs and Gopalganj district administration jointly organised the rally joined by schoolchildren of different educational institutions at Tungipara, the birthplace of Bangabandhu.

Rafiatur Zaman, a student of a local school, presided over the function while State Minister for Women and Children Affairs Meher Afroz Chumki was present as the special guest. Rittik Zidan, also a student, gave the welcome address.

Hasina advised children to follow the directives of their teachers, parents and guardians as well as maintain discipline in all spheres of life.

She also mentioned that education is the most "valuable asset" in life.

That is why her government has created better opportunity for the children's education to flourish their talent and merit, she said.

Urging children to follow the ideals of Bangabandhu, Hasina said Bangabandhu was the leader of the exploited and deprived people across the world.

Later, the PM distributed prizes among the children who participated in literary, cultural and art competitions.
