Senator Edward Kennedy
2009-09-06T22:00:00+06:00 | M. Emad, Oxford, UK
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-104645

A friend of Bangladesh and world humanity - US Senator Edward (Ted) Kennedy died of brain cancer on the 25th August 2009 at the age of 77 at his home in Massachusetts.

The Kennedys were familiar names in the then East Pakistan, but I was surprised at the reaction of common people of Dhaka (Dacca) after the killing of Senator Robert (Bob) Kennedy in 1968  a feeling of affection, respect and regard.

In 1971, when Bangladesh struggled to survive from the US government-aided Pakistan army and when 10 million Bengalis fled to India to save their souls -- the bold stance of Senator Edward Kennedy against Bangladesh Genocide and Nixon-Kissinger administration, support for the refugees and strong criticism against the secret military trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in West Pakistan made him a leading spokesman for Bangladesh cause (probably after Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi).

Each of Senator Kennedy's statements and activities during the genocide days boosted the morale and hope of Bengalis in Bangladesh (and West Pakistan), India and other parts of the world. Bengalis in occupied Bangladesh (and West Pakistan) secretly listened the news from the forbidden radios (BBC, Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro, All India Radio, etc). Unfortunately, Bangladesh bade goodbye to these trusted friends after 1975.

We request Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and Bangladesh government to (1) introduce the "Friend of 1971 Bangladesh" highest honorary award (2) Issue the "Friend of 1971 Bangladesh" series of commemorative stamps honouring late Senator Kennedy by featuring his refugee camp visit photo (and also stamps for the 'Concert for Bangladesh' group  George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Eric Clapton, Ringo Starr, Ustads Ravi Shankar, Ali Akbar Khan, Alla Rakha Khan; former British MP John Stonehouse etc.) (3) Name major streets in Dhaka and other big cities after the "Friend of 1971 Bangladesh".

Senator Kennedy will be remembered in the USA as the protector and spokesman of the US minorities (black, women, refugees) and in Bangladesh as a friend in need.

***

In 1971, the then American government opposed our liberation war and they acted in favour of the Pakistani junta. But Senator Edward Kennedy, brother of President Kennedy, could not agree to his government's activities. The world heard his voice against Nixon, Kissinger and Yahya Khan. He came to India to see for himself the sorrows of the refugees from Bangladesh. After our independence, Kennedy again came to the liberated Bangladesh. Actually, he was one of our genuine friends. He planted the banyan tree in front of the building of Art Faculty of Dhaka University. The tree is now a very big one.  Kennedy's heart was also very big.

The oppressed of this earth have lost their spokesman which is a permanent loss for them, no doubt.

Harun-or-Rashid,

Sobhanbag, Dhaka
