Tribute to Senator Edward M. Kennedy
2009-09-06T22:00:00+06:00 | Akku Chowdhury
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-104659

Edward M. KennedyPhoto: AFP

WHEN the people of Bangladesh were being brutalised, raped, killed, maimed and taking refuge in India, Senator Edward Kennedy came to stand by their side. It was a crucial move by this young 37 years old Massachusetts senator to stand up to the Nixon-Kissinger administration, which was directing a policy to resolutely support Pakistan, the prime perpetrator of the genocide being committed in Bangladesh.

As the US Administration turned a blind eye to the atrocities being committed by Pakistan military to suppress the independence movement by Bangladesh Senator Kennedy, along with few other senators and congressmen, spoke out to alert the world and especially the American people. We recollect here diplomats like Archer Blood, who informed the state department about the real situation in Bangladesh and requested to speak out.

Teddy Kennedy didn't stop at just addressing the Senate, he traveled to India to see the plight of the refugees and meet with them so he could document the pain and the suffering of 10 million displaced Benaglees. On his return he gave a report to the judicial committee on refuges calling what he saw "one of the most appalling tides of misery in modern times."

Although the Nixon Administration maintained its stance to continue support and arm the Pakistan military, Kennedy kept his focus to spotlight on the genocide and carry the Americans with him to share in the outrage. Besieged, the U.S. Congress passed a bill later that year to ban arms sales to Pakistan.

On Valentine's day in 1972, Teddy Kennedy along with his wife and nephew arrived in independent Bangladesh and was given a hero's welcome with "Joi Bangla, Joi Kennedy" slogans. He visited the Dhaka University, where the Pakistan army began the carnage on the night of March 25, 1971, and planted a sapling to replace the banyan tree which the Pakistan army had uprooted, thinking that the tree symbolised the Bengalee obsession for freedom and democracy. The banyan tree stands as a testament to a country that can overcome all odds to survive and the man who came forward to assist the people, in whatever little way he could, in its creation.

Edward Kennedy continued to be the champion of the downtrodden, not only in his country but the world over. That's why the nations of the world, from one end to the other, remember the "lion of the Senate" that cared for their cause.

As he once said: "We know the future will outlast all of us, but I believe that all of us will live in the future we make." How prophetic a message, Edward Kennedy will truly always live on.

We recall the eulogy he gave on June 8, 1968, for his slain brother Robert Kennedy at St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York city. He said of Bobby:

"My brother need not be idealised, or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life, to be remembered simply as a good and decent man, who saw wrong and tried to right it, saw suffering and tried to heal it, saw war and tried to stop it. Those of us who loved him and who take him to rest today, pray that what he was to us and what he wished for others will some day come to pass for all the world. As he said many times, in many parts of the nation, to those he touched and who sought to touch him: 'Some men see things as they are and say why. I dream things that never were and say why not."

Edward Kennedy too was "a good and decent man, who saw things as they are and saw wrong and tried to right it, saw suffering and tried to heal it, saw war and tried to stop it." As we observe the beginning of the worst war the world ever saw, seventy years ago, let us also vow to try to stop all wrongs and all wars as we pay respect to Senator Edward Kennedy.

Akku Chowdhury is Trustee, Liberation War Museum.
