Several districts got taste of freedom on this day
2009-12-07T22:00:00+06:00 | Star National Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-116848

A month-long Bijoy Mela where paintings of artist Shahabuddin are displayed will be inaugurated by Foreign Minister Dr Dipu Moni on Chandpur Hasan Ali High School ground today.Photo: STAR

On December 8 in 1971, several areas of the country including Moulvibazar, Brahmanbaria, Patuakhali and Chuadanga districts were freed from the Pakistani occupation forces.

Freedom fighters fought quite a few battles against Pakistan forces at different places of Moulvibazar district during the Liberation War.

In the battle at Dholoi Border outpost under Kamalganj upazila, Sipahi Hamidur Rahman sacrificed his life to save his fellow freedom fighters.

After the independence, Hamidur Rahman was awarded the country's highest gallantry award 'Birshrestha' along with six other war heroes.

On December 2, freedom fighters and Indian allied forces attacked the Pakistani Army base at Shamshernagar Airport, forcing the occupation army to retreat towards Moulvibazar town.

The final victory in the district was won on December 8 after a fierce battle at Baratila in which 127 men of Indian allied forces were killed.

However, people of Moulvibazar are unhappy as construction of the martyred freedom fighters' memorial near Monu Bridge in the town is yet to be complete.

Moulvibazar liberation day observance committee has chalked out daylong programmes including placing wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar, discussion, rally and cultural function to mark the day.

Our Brahmanbaria Correspondent reports: People of Brahmanbaria will celebrate today as the district was liberated from the Pak army and their collaborators on this day in 1971.

On December 2 and 3, several groups of freedom fighters attacked the Pak army in Azampur, Mukandapur, Harashpur, Shingarbeel, Senarbadi and Akhaura check post areas, said Awami League lawmaker advocate Lutful Hye Satchu, the then guerrilla adviser. With heavy casualties, the Pak troops retreated to Brahmanbaria and Ashuganj.

The Pak army aided by their collaborators killed a large number of people including a few intellectuals.

On December 6 night, the freedom fighters and Indian allied forces launched attacks on the Pak army at Ashuganj from three sides. Defected Pak army fled to Bhairab on December 7.

On December 8 morning, late Johur Ahmed Chowdhury, chief of Eastern Civil Zone of Liberation War, hoisted the national flag of Bangladesh at Puratan Kachari in Brahmanbaria.

Seventeen mass graveyards in Brahmanbaria still bear testimony to the massacres committed by the Pak army and their collaborators.

Brahmanbaria district command of Bangladesh Muktijoddha Sangsad has taken elaborate programmes to mark the day.

Our Patuakhali Correspondent reports: Heroic freedom fighters freed Patuakhali from Pakistan occupation forces on December 8 in 1971.

In the last week of November, new groups of freedom fighters entered Patuakhali and launched several attacks on the Pakistani troops.

The occupation forces faced a crushing defeat in the battle at Panpatti village in Galachipa on November 28.

Finally the Pak forces left the district on the night of December 7 and freedom fighters declared the area free the next day.
