Indomitable spirit of 1971 still vivid
2009-12-16T22:00:00+06:00 | Helemul Alam, back from Sirajganj
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-118038

Against the Pakistani force's modern weapons and ammunition, the freedom-loving youths of Palashdanga Jubo Shibir in Sirajganj had almost nothing except the unrelenting urge to liberate the motherland from occupying forces, autocracy and repression.

They, however, had the advantage of local knowledge and tactics they could use. They used to take shelter on boats in wetlands and rivers.

Their struggle for an independent land, though little documented in history, paid off. The heroism of the laymen-turned guerrillas of Jubo Shibir in Sirajganj can still be an inspiration to the people who have not seen the Liberation War with their own eyes.

Palashdanga Jubo Shibir was formed by some student leaders who did not go to India for training to fight against the Pakistani forces. They had only one two-inch mortar but the shells never missed the targets.

The guerrilla force, which started exercise in February, 1971 with sticks, fought around 100 battles in around 1,200 square miles including Sirajganj, parts of Tangail, Vangura, Chatmohor, Santhia, Bera, Bunari Nagar and Faridpur in Pabna, remote areas of Gurudaspur in Natore and Sherpur and Dhunat in Bogra. During the battles none of the Jubo Shibir members were killed. Only a few got injured.

Almost four decades have passed but the memories of their heroic fights are still fresh.

Lutfar Rahman Arun, battalion commander of Palashdanga Jubo Shibir said, "It was the early hours of November 11, 1971. We were preparing on our boats to attack the Pakistani army since we had information of an impending attack. But before completing preparations we heard shots fired from automatic weapons."

They then hurriedly got down from the boats on Chalan Beel and took positions on the bank of ponds, in aisles, and jungles of Handial Naogaon in Tarash.

Around 450 freedom fighters formed a crescent of around one kilometre in length from Hazrat Shahsharif Jindani (R) Shahi Masjid Mazaar to the north. The Pakistani forces were firing on them from paddy fields.

"We were very fortunate that two Pakistani jets missed their targets. They bombed Mohakuma Naogaon instead of Handial Naogaon where we were," said Arun, who was once a corporal in the Pakistani Army. He deserted the army and became a freedom fighter.

Talking to The Daily Star at his home in Sirajganj, Arun said, as it was hard for the Pakistanis to position themselves in paddy fields due to water and mud, they were easy to beat. They stopped firing around 1:00pm. The battle was over by 2:00pm.

More than 200 Pakistani soldiers of two companies were killed and 11 Pakistani soldiers including captain Salim detained. Villagers also detained a soldier and killed 50 to 70 razakars, said Sohrab Ali Sarkar, commander in chief of the guerrillas.

Villager Khademul Islam initially hid in a pond in Telipara during the battle but joined the freedom fighters with lethal weapons alongside many other villagers when they realised the freedom fighters were in a good position.

He said, "Along with some villagers I killed a Razakar and caught a Pakistani soldier who had hidden himself in a bush."

Arun said the villagers took the opportunity of Pakistani force's defeat that day and killed around 50 to 70 razakars. The next day the Pakistani forces took revenge of this killing by torching several nearby villages.

At least 13 people were killed during the Pakistani Army's retaliation at Ambaria in Sirajganj.

Lutfar Rahman, son of Yaar Mohammad who was among the 13 dead, said his father was the headmaster of Dabila High School and used to help the freedom fighters. They torched the entire village.

Sohrab, now the convener of Sirajganj district command of Bangladesh Muktijoddha Sangsad said, "This was our most successful battle after forming Palashdanga Jubo Shibir on May 10, 1971."

The Jubo Shibir members' camps were on 50 to 80 boats, said Arun, the main trainer of around 2,000 freedom fighters. They had a chain of command just like an organised armed force. The battalion had six companies, eight platoons, and 54 "sections". Two women--Eliza Shirazi and late Hamida Khatun--also participated with the Jubo Shibir indirectly.

"Our strategy was to collect weapons after attacking Pakistani forces, their collaborators and police stations," said Bimal Kumar Das, co-commander-in-chief of the battalion.

They had begun exercise with sticks in February, 1971 and around 500 students were trained in Sirajganj College ground, said Sohrab Ali Sarkar, who was the vice-president of Sirajganj College Students Union then and later became the commander-in-chief of the Jubo Shibir.

Asked why they started training before the Liberation War began, he said the situation back then led them to believe that a war might be imminent.

"We started training with firearms only after March 26," he said, adding that after failing to resist the Pakistani forces, they started mobilising themselves.

Five student leaders--Lutfar Rahamn Makhon, pro-VP of Sirajganj College Students Union, Monirul Kabir, Aziz Sarkar, Shafikul Islam and Sohrab met at Sonagachcha in Sirajganj in mid-April. They took shelter at Bhadraghat and continued mobilising more freedom fighters.

After a few days Arun returned from India to join them, while villagers Ali Imam, Dulu, Yusuf Ali, Akhtar Hossain Mondol, Akhtar Pramanik and many others also joined them. Abdul Aziz Sharkar, assistant director of (communication and collection) of Jubo Shibir, named the guerrilla force on May 10. Abdul Latif Mirza, a labour leader, joined them in the middle of May as a director.

"We faced the first attack on June 17 at Bhadraghat when we had 41 members and had only fifteen .303 rifles, one light machinegun and six other rifles. With those small arms we tactfully shot 11 Pakistani soldiers dead," said Arun.

"Of the total 100 battles, the battles at Handial Naogaon in Sirajganj and Brahmagachcha were the big ones," said Arun, adding that 31 Pakistani soldiers, 19 militias and 22 razakars were killed in the fight at Brahmagacha in late August of 1971.

The other battles include the ones at Tarash, Faridpur, Ghaitan Rail Bridge, Kochikata in Gurudaspur, Solonga in Sirajganj, Zaol Bridge in Kamarkhanda, Kalia Haripur Bridge, Chagla Pagla Bridge and Dakhola Bridge in Ullapara of Sirajganj, Dilpasha Bridge in Bhangura, Pabna and Koidanga Bridge in Naogaon.

"After the November 11 battle, a large group of us went to India on November 18 to get ammunition," said Sohrab, adding that four groups led by section commander Abdul Khaleque, section commander Rafikul Islam, company commander Khorshed Alam and platoon commander SM Amir continued battles in Sirajganj.

"We attacked Shahjadpur Police Station during the Indian air strike, captured the police station and raised the flag of independent Bangladesh on December 14," said Khaleque, now convener of Bangladesh Muktijoddha Sangsad in Shahjadpur.

He said, "On December 15, I led around 50 freedom fighters to attack a Pakistani camp in Baghabari from Nokali in Shahjadpur, while another group led by former lawmaker Awrangajeb of Abdur Razzak Mukul's force attacked the Pakistani forces from Alokdia."

The Pakistani forces fled Baghabari towards Dhaka after about eight hours of battle, he said.

Another group led by SM Amir and some other groups of freedom fighters fought against the occupying forces on December 15 and 16 at Dhitpur in Shajadpur, Khaleque said, adding that the entire Sirajganj became free from Pakistani forces on December 16.

Lutfar Rahman Arun laments, "Although our battalion made significant contributions in the Liberation War, none of our leaders got any gallantry awards from the government."

Even the name of this guerrilla force was not found in the 15-part Swadhinata Juddho Dalilpatra published by the government, he noted.
