ARGUS UNDER ANAESTHESIA
2016-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Razia Khan
https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/independence-day-2016/argus-under-anaesthesia-1199617

The march of the hunted across a land No longer their own began At a haunted dawn Yet only last summer, the last ever Flowering March, golds and emeralds Quivered in lush orchards— Now burnt; scattered ashes enveloped The moving column In a thin safety of silence; The least noise was suicidal; A mother frenzied by the roar of mortars Throttled her whining infant: Its life for the life of millions. Bruised feet, bleeding hands; Dilated eyes enacting the frenzy of Oedipus. Corroding thirst dulled The sense of loss of violated wives, mothers, Sisters, butchered babies. Worst the burden of survival in a den Beyond the reach of bipeds Set loose by madmen with moron-eyes Spurting martial orders Between bouts of drunkenness. The lull left by sudden Departures lay heavy over the fields. The mourning corn

Bent with grief; impossible phantasmagoria Haunting the eyes Of deserted dogs and cattle; incredible Whiteness of human flesh, pigment Peeled off by blind bayonets; Crouching figures of raped Infants making the earth red. What shapes of space will Shelter them? Unused pipes, fragile Palm-leaf huts? Those who died on the way, will Never come to their heritage Of a bowl of rice— and cholera. Roofless even in death Their buried dreams float in the air. Stifled sighs echo through eloquent Trees; unlike Duncan's their humble blood Dried ungolden on hungry bones; Their names unwritten in the annals Of freedom—again and again A trampled bud—its elusive fragrance Wafted to eager nostrils by words And promises Minutes and manifestoes.

2 While the guinea-pigs trudge Towards some meagre shelter Sleek men sweat in winter clothes Seated at polished tables. The conference proceeds; pencil strokes confer Life and death on millions. When bony arms stretch for proferred Morsels global motives Are espied; new slogans coined to deter Feeding hands.

3 In a golden island far beyond The reach of these Marching millions, Eve in the shape Of a voluptuous politico Twitters in girlish glee—just returned From the holy land: “Genocide? No!— Only banquets, Lovely roses, bushy eye-brows, Exotic charm— a little brutal perhaps”, (But how an English rose Would love to be crushed in hairy arms!) As for happy triggers— To keep the colonies —why  that's No novelty to us! Be a sport—do let us dance! If he made Black Princes Glow all over the highways Of a maudlin land Where such roses are unheard of, that's All the more glory! “Contrary to common talk— said My charming host— The stumpy race is far from anaemic; Rich haemoglobin, Beneath pigmented skin”—so he launched This second crusade Between the opulent and the half-fed In Allah's name.

4 The demonic delta now wears a strange look! As the battle cry is sounded By a spray of machine-guns A true post-ablution Beauty bathes the ones sprawled In streets and promenades….. The vultures shall come Cheap scavengers—to supplement The economy of bayonets—in a protracted And sacred war A bullet is worth more than the feeble Heart-beat of a heathen. And behold! Now begins the miracle: The crowning glory of Jihad The holy feat of tearing rich pigmented skin open—to create Stupendous roses in a moist plain! Horticultural experiment; " Conquest of climate; call it what you will; And here Jill Is a rose for you and a rose for me As we dance to a waltz In this soft green malachite hall, Counting our victories! A few thousand dead! Heil Adolf! Eye-brows matching moustache! Swinging in katabolistic glee As I watch the friendly Banner coo assurances—my heart thaws! The Dialectics—no monopoly Of the Russians— do not exclude elimination Before new creation!”

5 Far, far away from the velvet-sweep The shot silk softness Of the tender waltz there are quivering raintrees Planted by romantic colonists. Beneath their cool breeze sleeps Selim, Physics undergrad; 3rd Year Honours Equal master of a seven-stringed Sitar His eyes—before they got erased By a bull-dozer—reflected for The fraction of a moment the sapphire March-sky of a land About to die out of the atlas. And there was Jyoti—the suave conversationalist Who kept the smile on his lips Till they became amorphous flesh in the mass-grave, Which also houses Modhu The varsity canteen-keeper for four decades: He grossly mispronounced The Kalimah hoping to survive by the incantation. Oh Gabriel, do not Call out to the Enshrouded One; He is only human— They are all gone, the men and the women Leaving this faith Not meant for mortals, to supermen; Dreamers of great concepts, Dynamic heroes the fabric of whose dreams Is often woven With the torn-down veins of unknowing men, Every now and then These high-priests of deception gather roses From common gardens To adorn the putrid shrine of their super-egoes. The roses, hence, We consecrate to them. What if these livid plants which Bore the roses should awake in a terrible Resurrection Armed like Argus with a myriad eyes; And with their Omniscient, cruel light burn the hypnotic Tongue of demagogues, Scald inept ringers glued to the reins And demand back Their broken lives, theirs To live or sacrifice?

Mittelweg, Hamburg 12. 11. 1971

Notes—The first two sections describe the exodus from Bangladesh to India of refugees in 1971. The third states the reactions of a woman Parliamentarian back from Pakistan to her native England to Yahya Khan's action in Bangladesh. The fourth is a kind of reverie undergone by Yahya. The fifth section shifts back from England and Pakistan to Bangladesh.
