Struggling since 1971..
2016-03-28T20:21:24+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/daily-star-books/news/struggling-1971-1200865

Mr Harun-Ar-Rashid is a renowned author, economist, researcher and columnist. Despite being a graduate of Accounting he has written on a wide array of social & political causes/issues. The author has published 40 different books so far as a social novel, research papers, stories and so on.

The book is a compilation of short stories, writings that try to portray the reality of how the saviors of our own country are being haunted by political goons & people with ill intentions. In some of the stories the author portrays the devastating lives they are living, some by pulling rickshaws or managing a tea stall.

In this book Harun-ar-Rashid focuses on the political exploitation and manipulation that freedom fighters of our country have to face at the hands of political leaders whose only agenda is self-gain. He discusses the need of the freedom fighters to overcome these hurdles through the development of their own establishments or platforms from where they can protest against such discriminatory behaviors. In the book he emphasizes the fact that using dirty politics as a ploy, the unity of freedom fighters is being broken. He has compiled stories of the sufferings of many freedom fighters who are still living life without getting the respect and dignity that they deserve. Harun-ar-Rashid talks about the selfless values and moral obligation that these people felt towards their country in 1971. It was patriotism and not materialistic considerations what motivated our freedom fighters.

At present many freedom fighters do feel they are neglected or treated with indifference as they are not politically affiliated to any party. Through this book, author attempts to clear out the confusions and presents the real truth regarding the current state of the glorious freedom fighters.

In one story, he talks about Noorjahan Begum, a widow, whose husband died fighting the Liberation War. Harun-ar-Rashid discusses the letter of appreciation and one thousand taka sent to her from Bangabandhu Sheikh MujiburRahman in which he thanked and acknowledged her husband's sacrifice to liberate the country.

Harun-ar-Rashid reminds readers that people took part in the Liberation war not for materialistic gains but because they felt a sense of patriotism and moral obligation towards their nation. It was on these values that the freedom fighters were born and so was a nation.
