Mujibnagar Day today
2016-04-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/mujibnagar-day-today-1209817

The historic Mujibnagar Day is being observed today to mark the formation of Bangladesh's first government that led the Liberation War in 1971.

Senior Awami League leaders assembled at a mango grove at Baidyanathtala, later named Mujibnagar, in Meherpur district on April 17, 1971 to form the provisional government of the independent Bangladesh in the absence of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Bangabandhu was arrested and flown to Pakistan after the Pakistan army had cracked down on the Bangalis on the night of March 25, 1971. He was declared the first president of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, while vice president Syed Nazrul Islam became the acting president.

Tajuddin Ahmad was appointed as the first prime minister, while Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed, M Mansur Ali and AHM Quamaruzzaman were named cabinet members.

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina have issued separate messages on the occasion.

The president in his message said, “Independence is the greatest achievement of the Bangali nation. It's our moral duty to present the proper history of our struggle for independence to the young generation.”

He hoped the young generation would know the true history of the Liberation War and involve themselves in nation-building.

In her message, Hasina urged people to engage themselves in building Bangladesh free from hunger, poverty and illiteracy.

To mark the day, the AL and different socio-cultural organisations will organise several programmes.

The ruling AL's programmes include hoisting of the national and party flags at Bangabandhu Bhaban, party central office and its all district unit offices across the country at 6:00am.

The PM will place a wreath at the portrait of Bangabandhu at Bangabandhu Bhaban in the city at 7:00am.

The ruling party leaders will place wreaths at the Memorial Monument at Mujibnagar at 10:00am. The AL will organise a public rally at Sheikh Hasina Mancha in Mujibnagar at 10.30am. AL General Secretary Syed Ashraful Islam will preside over the rally.

The party will also organise a discussion at the city's Krishibid Institution Auditorium at 3:00pm tomorrow. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, also the AL president, will be present as the chief guest.
