Historic Mujibnagar Day being observed
2016-04-17T10:36:24+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/historic-mujibnagar-day-being-observed-1210054

The historic Mujibnagar Day is being observed today marking the formation of Bangladesh's first government that led the War of Liberation in 1971.

Senior leaders of Awami League assembled at Baidyanathtala, a mango orchard, which was later named Mujibnagar in Meherpur district, on April 17, 1971 to form the provisional government of independent Bangladesh in the absence of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Bangabandhu was arrested after Pakistan military cracked down on the Bengalees on the night of March 25, 1971.

Sheikh Mujib was declared the first president of the People's Republic of Bangladesh while Vice-president Syed Nazrul Islam became the acting president in absence of Bangabandhu.

Tajuddin Ahmad was appointed the first Prime Minister, while Khandoker Moshtaque Ahmed, M Mansur Ali and AHM Quamaruzzaman were named cabinet members.

To mark the day, President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina issued separate messages.

In his message, Abdul Hamid said, "Independence is the greatest achievement of the Bangalee nation. It's our moral duty to present the proper history of our struggle for independence to the young generation. On the historic Mujibnagar Day, I hope the young generation will know the true history of the Liberation War apart from involving themselves in the nation-building inspired by patriotism."

Sheikh Hasina, in her message, urged the people of the country to engage themselves in building Bangladesh to be free from hunger, poverty and illiteracy as dreamt by Bangabandhu.

Awami League and different socio-economic organisations have chalked out elaborate programmes for the occasion.

The ruling Awami League's programmes include hoisting the national flag and party flags at Bangabandhu Bhaban, party central office and its all district unit offices at 6:00am.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina placed a wreath at the portrait of Bangabandhu at Bangabandhu Bhaban in Dhaka this morning.

The party will organise a public rally at Sheikh Hasina Mancha in Mujibnagar later in the day. AL General Secretary and Public Administration Minister Syed Ashraful Islam will preside over the rally.

AL will also hold a discussion in Dhaka at Krishibid Institution Auditorium at 3:00pm on Monday. Prime Minister and Awami League President Sheikh Hasina will be present there as the chief guest.
