Elements in AL acting against Liberation War spirit
2016-04-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/elements-al-acting-against-liberation-war-spirit-1212076

Speakers yesterday expressed their concern that elements within Awami League (AL), the party which led the country's struggle for freedom, had been creating barriers against spreading the true spirit of the Liberation War.

Muntassir Mamoon, president of Bangladesh Itihas Shommiloni, pointed out that there were writings against the Liberation War in the madrasa curriculum, which was developed with government money.

"Barriers are not always created by BNP or Jamaat (Jamaat-e-Islam), many are coming from within the government," he said, terming madrasas and parties like Olama League enclaves of Pakistan.

He emphasised the need for teaching the history of the Liberation War and culture, in pace with economic development, at a seminar on the history and spirit of the Liberation War and law against distortion of history.

Ekatturer Ghatak Dalal Nirmul Committee (Forum for Secular Bangladesh and Trial of War Criminals of 1971) organised the seminar at the WVA auditorium in the capital's Dhanmondi in observation of the 45th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, drawn on April 10, 1971.

Barrister M Amir-Ul Islam, one of the authors of the declaration, spoke of the background in which it came about.  He urged Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina to give a clear call against violence in the name of religion in the upcoming AL council.

"If we cannot prepare ourselves against extremism, we will no longer remain victors, rather, we will become victims," he said.

"Those who are around the prime minister, they are there only to flatter her to change their own fate," said Justice Shamsul Huda of Labour Appeal Tribunal, adding that these "sycophants" were taking her to a point which seems to be a bad omen.

Noted journalist and acting president of the committee, Shahriar Kabir, said the law against distortion of the Liberation War's history must be given constitutional protection so that no government could annul it in the  future.  Referring to Olama League and their opposition of Pahela Baishakh, Shahriar urged the Supreme Court to take steps against people whose statements go against the spirit of Bangladesh.

Justice Shamsuddin Manik and Barrister Tania Amir also spoke at the programme, chaired by noted journalist Kamal Lohani.
