Opinion: Nizami, Mojaheed were war heroes!
2016-05-26T13:02:52+06:00 | Shakhawat Liton
https://www.thedailystar.net/op-ed/opinion-nizami-mojaheed-were-war-heroes-1229713

The provincial assembly of Punjab in Pakistan did nothing wrong by passing a resolution recently seeking conferment of Nishan-e Pakistan on Jamaat-e-Islami leaders who were executed for committing crimes against humanity during the Liberation War of Bangladesh in 1971.

Its action is justified because Jamaat leaders had sided with Pakistan occupational army to carry out genocide on Bangalis to foil the birth of Bangladesh. Their goals were the same. Both the Pakistan army and Jamaat leaders fought to save united Pakistan and to uphold Pakistan's flag even by burying all Bangalis .

By committing the war crimes, Pakistan military generals did not face any trial. Pakistan all along supported them. And even Pakistani successive governments keep denying atrocities their army carried out in the soil of Bangladesh in 1971. To save them, the Pakistan government did not hesitate to hide the Hamoodur Rahman Commission report that found sufficient evidence of carrying out atrocities against the generals. The Pakistan even had gone to International Criminal Court in Hague to protect their beloved generals.

The Punjab assembly in its resolution termed the Liberation War of Bangladesh "Indo-Pak War". If it is so, then Jamaat leaders took part in a "crusade" in the name of Islam against a Hindu nation.

The defeat in 1971 could not demoralise much Jamaat-e-Islami leaders. They had continuously been trying to implement their agenda in independent Bangladesh by transforming the country into an Islamic Republic like the Pakistan.

So, execution of Jamaat-e-Islami leaders for the same offences shocked the conscious of Pakistan. It is not easy for them to accept the "injustice" to Jamaat leaders in Bangladesh. It is a matter of "great sorry" for the Pakistan ruling leaders.

The Punjab assembly's resolution is justified. The Pakistan government should not hesitate to confer the Nisha-e Pakistan on executed Jamaat leaders--- Motiur Rahman Nizami, Ali Ahsan Mohammad Mojaheed, Quader Mollah, Quamaruzzaman and others.

It is the highest of civil awards and decorations given by the Pakistan government for the highest degree of service to the country and nation of Pakistan.

Also read: Punjab wants award for executed Jamaat leaders

What Nizami, Mojaheed and other Jamaat leaders had done in 1971 was of course the highest degree of service to the Pakistan. So, they deserve the awards. In the eyes of Pakistani, Jamaat leaders are "war heroes".

After the execution of Nizami, Pakistan national parliament passed a resolution on May 11 expressing deep shock for the Jamaat chief, their friend.

The Pakistan foreign ministry also lied to defend Nizami as it claimed that what Nizami did in 1971 was to uphold the Pakistan constitution, which not existed then. By making the false claim, Pakistan proved once again, for a friend, telling lie sometimes justified!

In December 2013, the national parliament also passed a resolution after the execution of war criminal Quader Mollah.

Pakistan government did not do mistake to honour their friends. It has been proved when it conferred the Nishan-e Pakistan on Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in 2009, when he was premier of Turkey.

Erdogan also could not accept execution of Nizami. He lambasted the Bangladesh government for it. In his views, Nizami has "no earthly sin." Erdogan recalled his country's ambassador to Dhaka for consultation in a protest against the execution of Nizami. He also blasted Europe for not criticising Bangladesh government for executing Nizami.

So, it is time for Pakistan to honour their friends, Jamaat leaders, for their "highest service to Pakistan" in 1971. Conferment of the Nishan-e Pakistan is the proper award for the executed Jamaat leaders, who were also war heroes in 1971 in the eyes of Pakistan.
