Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra reminisced
2016-05-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/swadhin-bangla-betar-kendra-reminisced-1229560

The crackdown in Dhaka by the Pakistani forces on March 25, 1971 had pushed young Shamsunnahar into a complete darkness. Frightened, her parents sent her to grandfather's house in Comilla from the capital.

The timid girl, however, began to see a ray of hope as she heard Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's declaration of independence the next day from Chittagong's Kalurghat Radio Station that eventually turned into Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra.

“What a joy it was!” she reminisced. Shamsunnahar is now the principal of Home Economics College.

“The next day when Major Ziaur Rahman broadcast the declaration, I was even more energised and confident that we would be independent,” she added.

She is an epitome of the entire Bangalee nation that dreamt of an independent country with the constant inspiration generated by the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra, which turned 46 yesterday.

The radio centre, which evolved from the Kalurghat transmission centre in Chittagong, was abandoned after Pakistan Airforce shelled it on March 30. It resumed its operations from April 3, 1971 in Tripura of India and finally was shifted to Kolkata on May 25.

“It was the heartbeat of the Bangalees. The voice of the artists appeared to be of the angels,” said Prof Shamsunnahar in an emotion-choked voice at the anniversary function at Home Economics College.

Swadhin Bangla Betar Employees Council and Home Economics College jointly organised the programme that turned into a nostalgic gathering of the artistes and inspiration for the youths.

Ashraful Alam, a news presenter and scriptwriter for the radio station, said for a drama he needed the sounds of frogs and cricket [insect]. He had to remain in the nearby water body for hours to record it as it was not easy making a programme then, he said smilingly.

However, crossing all hurdles was possible because of the love for the nation and the freedom fighters who eagerly awaited their voices, he added.

“We knew the radio was the heart of Bangladesh during the Liberation War,” Ashraful said.

The inspirational songs and programmes like “Charampatra” and “Jallader Darbar” would make the freedom fighters, including him, determined and confident, said freedom fighter Maj (retd) Waker Hasan Bir Protik.

The speakers also urged the new generation to learn the history well so they can be proud of their forefathers.

Some, however, expressed frustration over the current state of affairs.

“The way a headmaster in Narayanganj was humiliated is unacceptable. It drew a countrywide protest, yet the teacher did not get justice. He remains in fear. Did we want this Bangladesh?” Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra head of news Kamal Lohani posed a question.

Shila Bhadra, an artist of the radio station, said she had to cross the border into India to perform. “I witnessed killings and tortures by the Pakistanis and wanted to inspire the nation through my voice,” she said.

“Sadly, such killings and tortures have not stopped. Amid us there are few who don't allow goodness or truth to move forward. In between good and evil, we became old and tired,” she told this correspondent.

She, however, thinks it is the new generation that can take the nation to such a height where all will have equal rights, peace and justice.

Artists and other employees of the radio centre – Rezaul Karim Chowdhury, Ashfaqur Rahman Khan, maulana Sheikh Md Ubaidullah bin Sayeed Jalalbadi, also spoke at the programme moderated by Monowar Hossain Khan, general secretary of Swadhin Bangla Betar Employees Council.

Artists of the radio station, Gendaria Kochi-Kachar Mela, Savar Oitijjya Shilpigoshthi, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University and Home Economics College performed at the programme.
