Another 23 Biranganas recognised as FFs
2016-05-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/another-23-biranganas-recognised-ffs-1230949

Twenty-three more Biranganas (war heroines) have been recognised as freedom fighters for their contribution in the country's Liberation War in 1971.

The Ministry of Liberation War Affairs issued a gazette notification in this regard on May 25.

With this, a total of 90 Biranganas received the freedom fighter status in three phases.

The liberation war affairs ministry, for the first time, recognised 41 Biranganas as freedom fighters on October 12 last year. On March 14, the ministry recognised another 26 Biranganas.

The Biranganas would now enjoy the same benefits as that of freedom fighters.

Once recognised, the Birangana would receive a monthly allowance of Tk 8,000 and special quotas in government jobs and benefits for their children and grandchildren.

Over 200 applications from the Biranganas are now under scrutiny at the Jatiya Muktijoddha Council, the central platform of the freedom fighters.

The process of recognising the Biranganas as freedom fighters began following a High Court order on January 27, 2014.

On January 29, last year, parliament unanimously passed a bill to include them in the list of freedom fighters.

At least 1.62 lakh women were raped, and another 1.31 lakh Hindu women went missing during the Liberation War, according to the War Crimes Facts and Findings Committee led by M Hassan.

The 23 war heroines who received freedom fighter status in the third phase are: Hamida Begum of Gaibandha, Rokeya Bewa, Shaleha Bewa, Nazimon, Saloki Bewa, Goljan Begum, Rubia Begum, Shirin Akter, Ayesha Begum of Natore, Shokina Khatun of Jamalpur, Nazma Akter of Barisal, Rezia Bagum of Brahmanbaria, Khodeja Begum and Manu Begum of Sylhet, Tomina Bewa of Thakurgaon, Nurjahan Begum of Comilla, Sokina Begum of Sherpur, Fatema of Gopalganj, Ambia Begum of Faridpur, Momtaj Begum of Gazipur, Ashia Khatun and Joshna Banu of Sirajganj.
