Learning about genocide and justice
2016-06-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Covered by Law Desk.
https://www.thedailystar.net/law-our-rights/learning-about-genocide-and-justice-1235326

Center for the Study of Genocide and Justice (CSGJ) of the Liberation War Museum organised a month-long certificate course on the issue of genocide and justice from 13 May till 4 June, 2016. The course, organised for the 4th time, was attended by 22 participants including students from both graduate and undergraduate levels, and professionals such as lawyer, banker, journalist and researcher.

The course was inaugurated by CSGJ's Chairperson Professor Emeritus Dr. Anisuzzaman, University of Dhaka. In his opening speech, he urged the participants to investigate the history of liberation war and the acts of genocide for the better assurance of justice for the victims and survivors of 1971.

Participants attended sessions conducted by the prominent scholars and practitioners in the field of international criminal law, genocide and history. Resource persons in the course included, Dr. M. A. Hasan, Convener of War Crimes Facts Finding Committee; Dr. Muntassir Mamoon, Professor of History, University of Dhaka; Shahriar Kabir, Author and Human Rights Activist; Professor Dr. Meghna Guhathakurta, Executive Director of Research Initiative Bangladesh; Barrister Sara Hossain, Advocate, Supreme Court of Bangladesh; Dr. Ashfaque Hossain, Professor of History, University of Dhaka; Dr. Abu Md. Delwar Hossain, Professor of History, University of Dhaka; Sheikh Hafizur Rahman Karzon, Associate Professor of Law, University of Dhaka; Mohammad Abdul Hannan Khan, Chief Coordinator of the Investigation Agency, ICT-BD; Barrister Tureen Afroz, Prosecutor of ICT-BD; Advocate Zead-Al-Malum, Prosecutor of ICT-BD; Dr. Katherine Li, Assistant Professor of Modern Languages, North-South University; Mofidul Hoque, Director of CSGJ and Trustee of Liberation War Museum; and Zayed Hasan, Coordinator of Samajik Sahayata Udyog.

Towards the end of, the course participants were divided into different group to prepare a work plan to be realised by utilising the lessons of this course.

In closing ceremony, Barrister M. Amir-Ul Islam, Drafter of the 1971 Proclamation of Independence and one of the members of the 1972 Constitution Drafting Committee, appreciated CSGJ for taking such an initiative to train up new generation regarding the trial of the perpetrators of genocide and crimes against humanity committed in Bangladesh. He specifically highlighted the importance of domestic trial of international crimes in today's world, and pointed out the relevance of ICT-BD for many other countries which are intending to come out of 'culture of impunity' to ensure justice for the victims.

Ziauddin Tariq Ali, Trustee of Liberation War Museum and Mofidul Hoque, Director of CSGJ wished the participants would continue imparting the lessons of this course in the days to come at both home and abroad.
