Another accuses Hussain
2016-06-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/34-hindu-murder-kishoreganj-1971-1235614

Another prosecution witness yesterday implicated Syed Mohammad Hussain alias Hossain, the alleged Nikli Thana Razakar commander, in the killing of 34 Hindu men including his father and relatives, rape of women and force conversion of Hindus to Islam.

Badal Chandra Sutradhar, the second prosecution witness in the case against Hussain and Muhammad Moslem Pradhan of Kishoreganj, gave a vivid description of the incidents and of Hussain's role, at the International Crimes Tribunal-1.

On Sunday, Badal Chandra Barman, the first prosecution witness in the case, gave almost a similar description over the incidents linking Hussain, younger brother of convicted war criminal Syed Mohammad Hasan.

Hussain and Moslem face six charges. Moslem is now in jail and pleaded not guilty, while Hussain is on the run.

Badal Sutradhar, 60, of Dampara village, said in the first part of the Bangla month of Bhadra, one Saheb Ali alias Teku, then chairman of both Dampara union and the Peace Committee formed there, arrived at their village with his associates. They said Razakar commander Syed Mohammad Hussain sent them and asked the Hindus to convert to Islam if they want to stay in the country. Then, the Hindu people of their village were converted, given Muslim names and kept under watch to see whether they practiced Islam, he said. “They told our Hindu women not to use vermilion. Then they destroyed the idols of gods and goddesses and religious books kept in our houses,” he added.

On Ashwin 6, Hussain, Teku Chairman, some 65 Razakars, and the Pakistani occupation army men arrived at Dampara Bazar by boat around 3:00pm, said Badal.

Some army men and 20 to 25 Razakars got down, detained some Hindus and brought them to one Banabasi Sutradhar's house in their village, he said.

The other group detained some other Hindus, including him, from the village and took them to the house, he added.

Keeping them under the surveillance of two armed Razakars and other Razakars, the army men went to neighbouring Nabinpur village, and when they returned after some time, they were heard saying the Hindus there had fled, said Badal.

The 39 detainees including him were taken to Nikli Police Station and following the order of Hussain, 35 adults were tied with ropes while he and three other minors were kept under a jackfruit tree in front of the station, he said.

The Razakars and army men started torturing the 35 with sticks and bayonets and then they took them away, said Badal.

Around 8:00pm, they heard gunshots and after an hour, the captors including Hussain returned, talking to each other about how the detainees were shot dead, he said.

Hussain and an army man released them the next day. His father, elder brother, five cousins, brother-in-law, three nephews were among the victims, he added.

He said one Kamini Barman had managed to flee the killing with a bullet wound in his hand. Badal said Razakars and Pakistani army men had also tortured women of their village that day. Defence counsel Abdus Sattar Palwan completed his cross-examination before the three-member tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque, who adjourned proceedings until June 12.
