Two Shariatpur 'Razakars' again implicated
2016-06-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/two-shariatpur-razakars-again-implicated-1236703

Two alleged Shariatpur Razakars yesterday were again implicated in the killing of scores of people, mainly Hindus, and rape of Hindu women during the 1971 Liberation War, this time by the second prosecution witness in a war crimes case.

Jalilur Rahman, 65, a freedom fighter, told International Crimes Tribunal-1 that he had seen some of the incidents and heard the rest. Earlier, Abdul Aziz Sikder gave a similar description.

Facing four charges, Sulaiman Mollah is now in jail and pleads not guilty while Edris Ali Sarder is on the run.

Jalilur said he was at home in Rudrakar village under Sariatpur Sadar Police Station on May 22 when he heard gunshots coming from neighbouring Dakkhin Madhyapara village around 6:00pm.

Around 25 minutes later, one bullet-hit Pakhi Das came to their home and told them that the Pakistani occupation army men and Razakars had carried out an attack, he said.

The next day, Jalilur said to have found one Abdus Samad's body in his home in neighbouring Kashavog village.

Samad's son Ismail told him that when the Pakistani army and Razakars attacked their village, Sulaiman and Edris identified his father as a freedom fighter and then army men shot his father dead, he added.

They also looted their houses, Jalilur said to have heard from Ismail.

He said to have found 200 to 250 bodies scattered around Dakkhin Madhyapara, mostly populated by Hindus, and villagers said to have told him that Sulaiman, Edris and some other Razakars and Pakistani army men committed the killings.

Around 11:30am that day, Razakars and army men arrived at their home, detained him and kept him confined to the house of a landlord, Promod Lal Chakrabarty, he said.

He said to have recognised Sulaiman, Edris, Yusuf Mia, Yunus Mia, Arshed Ali Choukider and Aziz Mollah among the Razakars. All but Sulaiman and Edris have passed away, he added.

While looting and vandalising the landlord's houses, Sulaiman, Edris and some other Razakars handed over Chandra Mohan Chakrabarty, a priest of the house, to the army men and the army men shot him dead, said Jalilur.

Then the captors forced him and another detainee, Abul Kalam Hawlader, to carry a sack of bullets to Angaria Bazar, said the witness.

Razakars detained and brought some 30 to 35 Hindus, including women, from Malopara, said Jalilur, adding that the captors released him and Abul as they were Muslims and took the others to an army camp set up at AR Howlader Jute Mill.

After three days, 20 women returned and Jalilur said to have learnt from some of them that five to six women were tortured while male captives shot dead.

The witness said Hindus of Malopara and Madhyapara left for India afterwards.

Defence counsel Gazi MH Tamim completed cross-examining Jalilur before the three-member tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque adjourned proceedings until today.
