Hindus, Muslims helped each other in '71 refugee camps
2016-06-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/hindus-muslims-helped-each-other-71-refugee-camps-1243168

Hindus and Muslims helped each other in overcoming their crises in refugee camps in India during the Liberation War of Bangladesh, recalled foreign aid worker Julian Francis who had witnessed their sufferings first-hand.

“I had difficulty dealing with both Hindus and Muslims at refugee camps because we were not able to provide sufficient food,” he said. “The Muslims then decided to fast but I told them that they shouldn't fast as they were already weak. Then both communities helped each other to overcome the problem,” he added.

Julian, who worked as an Oxfam official in the refugee camps during the war, shared his memories at a programme, organised by the Liberation War Museum at its office in the capital, marking World Refugee Day, observed June 20. Julian Francis has been honoured as one of the friends of the Liberation War of Bangladesh.

Turning to the global situations, he observed that the tremendous refugee and migration issues had become political issues for some countries in the European Union and the United States. “But in fact countries like the UK and the US have been benefited and are strengthened by immigration,” he said.

Referring to the Syrian refugees, he advised Bangladeshis not to forget their past.

Julian reminisced about 1971 that the world had not then understood the enormity of the refugee problem and even the head offices of the UN and international NGOs like Oxfam were finding it hard to accept the reports that were coming to the their offices from Calcutta.

But 10 million Bangladeshis had to leave their own lands and take shelter at Indian refugee camps where they had to go through the crises created by an unjust war imposed on them by the Pakistanis and their local collaborators.

“In the field, we were witnessing death and disease on a scale that was unimaginable. I still have nightmares about the deaths of children in the refugee camps in India. I still remember as though it was yesterday, the wounds of men who had managed to arrive to safety after being attacked by machetes by the collaborators of the Pakistani authorities.”

Julian Francis encouraged Bangladeshis to celebrate their country's remarkable progress.

“Remembering the birth of Bangladesh should help us to redouble our efforts to see that the world shows more kindness to all the refugees being displaced and to see that the politicians work more seriously and concertedly to overcome all these problems which create the movement of the people as refugees,” he said.

Khaled Fansa, senior protection officer of The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) office in Dhaka, said it was not necessary to give Rohingyas nationality of Bangladesh but rather the government should ensure their fundamental rights until they could be able to go back to their own country safely.

Trustee Member of Liberation War Museum Mafidul Haque, among others, also spoke.
