Verdict on eight Jamalpur 'Al-Badr men' today
2016-07-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/verdict-eight-jamalpur-al-badr-men-today-1255345

International Crimes Tribunal-1 yesterday decided to deliver today its verdict in a case against eight Jamalpur “Al-Badr men” facing five charges, including murder, abduction, torture, confinement and arson committed during the 1971 Liberation War.

The prosecution and defence counsels on June 19 completed placing closing arguments before the tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque.

Prosecutor Tureen Afroz prayed for capital punishment saying they were able to prove the charges. One of the defence counsels, Syed Mizanur Rahman, said, “We want justice.”

SM Yousuf Ali and Shamsul Haque were arrested on March 2 last year and are now in jail.

Of the rest, Ashraf Hossain is believed to have fled to India while Prof Sharif Ahammed, Abdul Mannan, Abdul Bari, Harun and Abul Hashem are on the run in Bangladesh, the tribunal's investigation agency told a press conference last year.

BACKGROUND

According to the agency, Al-Badr, an auxiliary force of the Pakistani occupation army, first came to existence in Jamalpur and Sherpur.

Ashraf, along with executed war criminal Muhammad Kamaruzzaman, and Kamran, all leaders of Jamaat-e-Islami's the then student wing Islami Chhatra Sangha, organised Al-Badr in greater Mymensingh.  Sharif, Mannan, Bari, Harun, and Hashem were also involved with Islami Chhatra Sangha and became Al-Badr members, the agency said.

Sharif was a director of Islami Bank Bangladesh Ltd between 1987 and 2003 and executive and managing director of Bangladesh Publications Ltd, which owned the daily Sangram, between 1999 and 2013.

Shamsul, as a Jamaat candidate, ran for provincial assembly membership in the 1970's election from Jamalpur and Yusuf, also with Jamaat's ticket, vied for membership in the national assembly. Both were defeated.

Yusuf became a national assembly member through a “so-called” by-election in 1971, the agency said, adding that the duo patronised Al-Badr in Jamalpur.

On October 26 last year, the tribunal framed the five charges and the prosecution produced 25 witnesses, including the case's investigation officer, and some documentary evidence. The defence declined to produce any witness.

CHARGES

In the first charge, Shamsul and Yusuf were implicated for “facilitating and contributing” to abduction, torture, murder, plundering, arson and other inhuman acts committed in the then Jamalpur sub-division between April 22 and December 11.

According to the second, Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan, Bari and Harun were involved in the abduction, confinement and torture of at least six men and in killing three of them between July 7 and 22.

The third charge says Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan, Bari, Hashem, Shamsul and Yusuf were involved in the abduction and murder of an Awami League leader, Nurul Amin, also an organiser of the Liberation War, on July 10.

In the fourth charge, Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan and Bari were indicted for confinement, torture, murder and other inhuman acts committed in a torture cell at Ashek Mahmud College's degree hostel between April 22 and December 11.

According to the fifth charge, Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan, Bari, Hashem, Shamsul and Yusuf were involved in similar offences committed at a PTI Hostel which was turned into a torture camp.
