War crimes: Death for 3 Jamalpur Al-Badrs
2016-07-18T10:52:56+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/war-crimes-death-3-jamalpur-al-badrs-1255498

A war trial tribunal today sentenced three absconding Jamalpur Al-Badr men to the gallows and five others to jail until death for crimes committed against humanity during 1971 Liberation War.

- 2 in custody, remaining 6 absconding

- IGP, home secy told to arrest fugitives

- Death by firing squad or gallows

Those shown the gallows are Ashraf Hossain, Abdul Mannan, and Abdul Bari. SM Yousuf Ali, Shamsul Haque, Professor Sharif Ahammed, Harun and Abul Hashem have been given life in jail.

Among the eight, only SM Yousuf Ali and Shamsul Haque are in custody.

A three-member bench of the International Crimes Tribunal-1 led by Justice Anwarul Haque delivered the 289-page verdict in presence of the two convicted in custody.

Inspector general of police and the home secretary have been instructed to arrest the fugitives immediately and seek help from Interpol if necessary, according to the court.

Prosecution lawyer Tureen Afroz says her team is satisfied with the 100 percent conviction. Defence Lawyer Gazi MH Tamim said his side will appeal against the sentences awarded.

BACKGROUND

According to the investigation agency of the war crimes tribunal, Al-Badr, an auxiliary force of the Pakistani occupation army, first came to existence in Jamalpur and Sherpur.

Ashraf, along with executed war criminal Muhammad Kamaruzzaman, and Kamran, all leaders of Jamaat-e-Islami's the then student wing Islami Chhatra Sangha, organised Al-Badr in greater Mymensingh.  Sharif, Mannan, Bari, Harun, and Hashem were also involved with Islami Chhatra Sangha and became Al-Badr members, the agency said.

Sharif was a director of Islami Bank Bangladesh Ltd between 1987 and 2003 and executive and managing director of Bangladesh Publications Ltd, which owned the daily Sangram, between 1999 and 2013.

Shamsul, as a Jamaat candidate, ran for provincial assembly membership in the 1970's election from Jamalpur and Yusuf, also with Jamaat's ticket, vied for membership in the national assembly. Both were defeated.

Yusuf became a national assembly member through a "so-called" by-election in 1971, the agency said, adding that the duo patronised Al-Badr in Jamalpur.

On October 26 last year, the tribunal framed the five charges and the prosecution produced 25 witnesses, including the case's investigation officer, and some documentary evidence. The defence declined to produce any witness.
