Sherpur Razakar suspect arrested
2016-08-23T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/sherpur-razakar-suspect-arrested-1274002

Detectives yesterday arrested an accused in Sherpur yesterday hours after International Crimes Tribunal-1 issued an arrest warrant against him for allegedly committing crimes during the 1971 Liberation War.

SM Aminuzzaman Faruk, 58, of Eshibpur village in Nokla upazila of the district, was held near the upazila headquarters, Golam Haider, officer-in-charge of Nokla Police Station, told The Daily Star.

Earlier in the day, the tribunal issued the warrant against the alleged Razakar member following a petition moved by prosecutor Rezia Sultana Chaman.

In her petition, the prosecutor said investigation in the case began on November 19 last year and the investigation officer has already found “his involvement” in at least two incidents of murder committed in 1971.

The accused is an influential person of his locality and he may “try to influence the witness not to give evidence against him”, said Chaman, adding that the accused may flee if he is not arrested.

Chaman later said Shamsuzzaman, father of Aminuzzaman, was the convenor of Nokla Peace Committee, an anti-liberation organisation, and Aminuzzaman was a member of local Razakar force. The tribunal fixed October 31 for passing the next order in the case.

Meanwhile, the tribunal yesterday granted a prosecution petition to show an alleged Razakar of Mymensingh, now living in Godagari upazila in Rajshahi, arrested in a case filed in connection with war-time offences.

The accused, Akkel Ali alias Raisuddin Azadi, 73, of Alali village under Pagla Police Station in Mymensingh has been in jail since August 17 after police arrested him in a murder case.

Earlier, Khalilur Rahman Meer, Abul Kalam alias Samsuzzaman, Mohammad Abdullah, and Abdul Malek Akanda alias Abul Hossain, were shown arrested in the case. Prosecutor Rezia Sultana Chaman told the tribunal that during a probe against Khalilur, the investigation officer found “involvement of Akkel Ali”.

She said the accused is now in a Rajshahi jail but he might go into hiding after obtaining bail. So, he needed to be shown arrested and kept in jail for proper investigation, she argued.
