Pierre Trudeau given Liberation War Honour
2016-09-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Bss, Montreal, Canada
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/pierre-trudeau-given-liberation-war-honour-1285639

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has conferred Bangladesh Liberation War Honour award posthumously on former Canadian premier Pierre Elliott Trudeau.

She handed over the “Friends of Liberation War Honour” award to Pierre Trudeau's son and Canada's incumbent Prime Minister Justin Trudeau after holding a meeting with him at Hyatt Regency Montreal on Friday.

The Bangladesh government awarded the honour to Pierre Trudeau for his support and outstanding contribution to the Liberation War in 1971.

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque, Foreign Minister AH Mahmood Ali and Bangladesh High Commissioner to Canada Mizanur Rahman were present.

While handing over the award, Hasina said Trudeau was one of the few international leaders who stood firm for the people of Bangladesh in their struggle for independence, Foreign Secretary Md Shahidul Haque told reporters after the event.

“Pierre Trudeau spoke in favour of Bangladesh's Liberation War at the international level, and Canada was one of the first countries to recognise Bangladesh immediately after its independence,” she said.

Trudeau also openly supported Bangladesh's membership in the United Nations and the Commonwealth, the PM added.

Shahidul said, “The award was handed over through reminiscing of the relations between the fathers of two leaders.”

The occasion was special in that both Hasina and Justin Trudeau are the “second generation” of their prime minister fathers, the foreign secretary added.

The PM expressed gratitude to her Canadian counterpart for receiving the award on behalf of his family.

“I wish prosperity and happiness of the friendly people of Canada and good health, long life and happiness of his Excellency Justin Trudeau and his family members,” she said.

Hasina hoped the existing friendly relations between the two countries would continue to grow in future.
