Revisiting 1971
2010-03-27T00:00:00+06:00 | A Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-131715

“March 25, 1971, it's 11:20 pm by the clock; we could hear the Pakistani army convoy at a distance -- with tanks and heavy machine guns they have already surrounded us, we wait with our 303 rifles in hand, we wait for them to come -- to get closer,” said Md. Shahjahan Mian, who was a wireless operator with the East Pakistan police, recalling that fateful night of March 25, 1971 when the Pakistani Army stormed the Rajarbagh Police Lines.

The night of March 25, 1971 -- penned in the history of Bangladesh as the “Black Night”, the night when the Pakistani Army carried out a series of killings throughout Dhaka. Among the first places hit was the Rajarbagh Police Line. Here the brave policemen faced the full force of the Pakistani army. Armed with nothing more than rifles, 150 of them laid down their lives embracing martyrdom that night.

“We fought as long as we could but as we ran out of bullets, we had to fall back,” said Mian.

On the eve of March 26, hundreds of candles were lit at the Shaheed Smriti Shoudho premises, Rajarbagh Police Line.

Through discussions, cultural performances, and emotional tunes on bugles Shammilito Shangskritik Jote (SSJ) and Bangladesh Police observed the 'Black Night' and paid homage to the ones killed on March 25 and also celebrated the early hours of Independence Day. A minute's silence was observed on the occasion. As part of the cultural performance, theatre troupe Mohakal staged the play “Ghum nei”.

Among others, Bulbul Islam, Rokaiya Hasina, Nargis Chowdhury and  Jharna Sarkar performed at the programme.

“On the night of March 25, at Rajarbagh it was the police who opened fire at the Pakistani Army first and they put up a huge resistance; the programme aimed at bringing their role to limelight,” said Hassan Arif, general secretary, SSJ.

Organised in association with Bangladesh Police literature and cultural subcommittee, State Minister for Home Affairs Advocate Shamsul Huq Tuku was the chief guest at the programme. Among others Nasiruddin Yousuff, president, SSJ; Inspector General of Police Nur Mohammad; DMP Commissioner A.K.M. Shahidul Haque and other senior police officials were present at the event. The programme was coordinated by Selim S. H. Chowdhury, organising secretary, SSJ.
