600 embraced martyrdom on this day in Rangpur
2010-03-28T00:00:00+06:00 | BSS, Rangpur
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-131899

Rakta Gourab, a memorial built in honour of the Liberation War martyrs at Nishbetganj in Rangpur. PHOTO: BSS

Today is Nishbetganj massacre day.

On this day in 1971, around 600 people embraced martyrdom as Pakistani army fired indiscriminately on thousands of freedom-loving people who proceeded towards Rangpur Cantonment to capture it from the occupation forces.

According to plan of local political leaders and students, some 30,000 people of dozens of villages of Sadar, Badarganj and Mithapukur upazilas and adjoining areas started for the cantonment from the morning, knowing well that they would face huge Pakistani forces equipped with heavy arms.

As a large number of people advanced towards the cantonment from the south and south-western directions to capture it 'at any cost', CPB leader late comrade Soyer Uddin and AL leader Majibar Rahman Master addressed the a spontaneous gathering at Nishbetganj near the cantonment, according to local citizens and the book 'Juddhe Juddhe Swadhinata' written by Major Nasir Uddin.

Along with Bangalees, many indigenous people carrying spears and bows and arrows also joined the march.

The Pakistani forces led by Brig Gen Abdullah Malik and Col Sagir fired indiscriminately towards the freedom-loving people, killing over 600 people and injuring hundreds more.

Non-Bengali collaborators of the occupation forces also took part in the massacre.

The vast green grass fields in Nishbetganj area and adjoining banks of River Ghaghot soon turned red with flowing bloods of the heroic Bangalees and the air became heavy with groaning of the injured.

The barbaric forces charged bayonets to ensure death of a number of injured

people before putting the bodies into Nishbetganj mass grave there.

Following Nishbetganj massacre, Bangalee army men, members of the then EPR, students, police, Ansar and cross sections of people in the area joined the Mukti Bahini with a vow to liberate the nation.

People in general helped the freedom fighters who formed fierce resistance to the Pakistani occupation forces till the final victory on December 16.

Construction of memorial 'Rakta Gaurab' at Nishbetganj mass grave was completed on November 21, 2002.

Rangpur district administration has taken elaborate programmes including placing wreaths at Rakta Gaurab and a discussion meeting at Rangpur Town Hall in memory of the martyrs.
