A charter of demands at Shaheed Minar
2016-12-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/events/charter-demands-shaheed-minar-1323139

For the first time, artistes and media personalities have set aside work and  taken time off from their busy schedules to gather together to put forward their demands. The gathering, organised by Federation of Television Professionals Organisation (FTPO) took place yesterday at Shaheed Minar at10am. The artistes, donned in red, carried forward the slogan "Shilpe Baachi, Shilpo Bachai."

The event kicked off with the placing of floral wreathes at the national monument, singing the national anthem, followed by the presentation of a five point charter. Mamunur Rashid, convenor of FTPO in his speech said, "We have been able to gather here today at a location that stands for a revolutionary cause, and hope that we are able to fulfill our demands."

The concept paper was read out by Gazi Rakayet, secretary FTPO who added, "This gathering here today is not protesting against the government, nor against any television channel. We come forth in peace to make ourselves heard today." This was followed with a memorial speech by Sanjida Pritee as a mark of respect to artistes and other members of the media who have passed on. Hasan Imam, ATM Shamsuzzaman and Abul Hayat also shared a few words. Abul Hayat said, "It is a matter of great sorrow knowing that while there are so many great artistes and directors here, foreign programmes are given a lot of air time and preference."

There was a brief break during which artistes performed songs and skits. Among them, Chanchal Chowdhury and Tareen performed songs whilst others performed short skits at the venue.

Then followed speeches by Tauquir Ahmed, Bipasha Hayat, Shahiduzzaman Selim, Zahid Hasan and Rosy Siddiqui. Tauquir Ahmed said, "We must also ask ourselves whether there is the necessity for so many television channels in our country."

Organisations such as Bangladesh Group Theatre Federation and Rtv expressed their solidarity with the cause.
