President, PM pay tribute to martyred intellectuals
2016-12-14T08:39:40+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/president-pm-pay-tribute-martyred-intellectuals-1329589

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid their tributes to the martyred intellectuals by placing wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals' Mausoleum in Rayerbazar area of the capital on Wednesday.

After placing the wreaths, President Abdul Hamid stood in solemn silence for some time as the bugle played the last post.

Earlier, on the president's arrival at the mausoleum site, Abdul Hamid was received by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.

The prime minister also stood there in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the illustrious sons of the soil.

The president and prime minister talked to the war - wounded freedom fighters and family members of the martyred intellectuals who gathered there on the occasion and enquired about their wellbeing.

A smartly turned out contingent of Bangladesh Armed Forces gave a state salute, while the bugle played the last post at that time.

Members of the cabinet, the mayors of Dhaka North and Dhaka South City Corporations, the chiefs of the three services as well as high civil and military officials were present.

Flanked by central leaders of the party, Sheikh Hasina, also the president of Bangladesh Awami League, laid another wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial as the party chief.

Commerce Minister Tofail Ahmed, Agriculture Minister Begum Matia Chowdhury, Road Transport and Bridges Minister and AL General Secretary Obaidul Quader, Shipping Minister Shajahan Khan, Jatiya Sangsad Deputy Speaker Advocate Fazle Rabbi Mia, Chief Whip ASM Firoz, Awami League Presidium Member Advocate Sahara Khatun and Advisery Council Member Advocate Yusuf Hossain Humayun and other leaders and parliament members of the party were present.

Later, the Prime Minister talked to the war-wounded freedom fighters and the family members of the martyred intellectuals and enquired about their wellbeing.

Sheikh Hasina later went to Dhanmondi in the capital and placed a wreath at the portrait of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in front of Bangabandhu Memorial Museum marking the Martyred Intellectuals Day.

After placing the wreath, she stood there for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memory of Bangabandhu, the architect of independence.

Flanked by central leaders of the party, Sheikh Hasina laid another wreath at the portrait of Bangabandhu as the party chief.

On the night of December 14 in 1971, over 200 intellectuals including professors, journalists, doctors, artistes, engineers, and writers were picked up in Dhaka by the Pakistani occupation forces, aided by their local collaborators.

The intellectuals were taken blindfolded to torture cells in Mirpur, Mohammadpur, Nakhalpara, Rajarbagh and other locations in different parts of the city and later executed en masse at different killing grounds, most notably Rayerbazar and Mirpur.

Since then, the day is being observed as the Martyred Intellectuals Day.
