Liberation War: Inspiring creativity
2016-12-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Shah Alam Shazu
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/tv/liberation-war-inspiring-creativity-1330945

The Liberation War has inspired generations of artistes.  Noted actor Tariq Anam Khan and noted actor-director Tauquir Ahmed, reveal how the Liberation War has impacted   their work.

Tariq Anam Khan: I have acted in several Liberation War-based plays on the small screen and theatre. But I have also done a few movies based on the War.  I'm very fortunate that I did a number of Liberation War-based BTV plays produced by Atiqul Haq Chowdhury and Abdullah Al Mamun in the '80s.  It's really an honour for me as an artiste.

I did not get to do much work in theatre on the Liberation War. I staged the play “Payer Awaj Paowa Jaye” not so long ago. I also acted in Syed Shamsul Haq's TV play “Tora Shob Joyodhoni Kor” a long time ago. Syed Haq based the play on his story “Nil Dangsan”. Later, I brought the play on stage. My troupe Natyakendra staged another Liberation War-based play “Jera”. I also performed in the play when it was made for television.

At that time, I performed in a BTV play “Uthan” where the history of the Liberation War was presented in a distorted manner. The name of Bangabandhu was dropped from Proclamation of independence in the drama. We protested about this, and later, its series was dropped from the air.

During 1971, I worked with the Sector 9 during the entire nine months of Liberation War and there our work was to stage plays and render gono-sangeet at different camps of Freedom Fighters. The young boys and girls, who took part in the war, were inspired by our performances.  I also worked in some parts of Sector 8.

I can still remember the speech of March 7. I inspired everyone at the camps by delivering the speech repeatedly.

I was in Satkhira on the day of victory. I first heard the news of their surrender on radio. Refugees started to gather there with the slogan “Joy Bangla.” We also brought out a victory procession, as tears of joy rolled down my cheeks.

Tauquir Ahmed: The Liberation War and its story is probably my most favourite subject, and it is always a special experience to make a play or a film against that backdrop, or even to act in a story. I was a little boy in 1971, and that's why I am very happy about doing Liberation War-based plays and cinema. This kind of story has a special spot in my heart, and that is why I made “Joyjatra”. I did not see the War but it seemed to me that I have seen and felt it through the film.

I had to put in a lot of effort for “Joyjatra”. It was very tough to shoot in the river. But I forgot all the pain after its release. My heart is still filled with joy when I am showered with compliments for it both at home and abroad.
