Victory Day Celebrations across the border
2016-12-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Zahangir Alom
https://www.thedailystar.net/events/victory-day-celebrations-across-the-border-1331398

India's contribution in our War of Liberation was immense. Indian people and government provided Bangladeshis with shelter, training and arms while Indian army shed their blood in our soil to free Bangladesh. It is especially the people of Tripura who whole-heartedly supported us, according to former Bangladeshi ambassador Wahidur Rahman, who took shelter in a Tripura camp during the Liberation War. The then 17-year old Freedom Fighter came to Agartala for the second time as a guest of honour to admit his debt and heartfelt gratitude to the people and the government of Tripura.

Assistant High Commission for the Peoples' Republic of Bangladesh, Agartala, India organised a Victory Day celebration programme at Rabindra Shatabarshiki Bhaban on December 16. Deputy speaker of Tripura Parliament Pabitra Kar inaugurated the programme as chief guest.

Going down memory lane, Pabitra Kar, who has his ancestral roots in Bangladesh, elaborated the chronological history and glorious movements of Bangladesh ranging from the Language Movement of 1952 to the Liberation War of 1971. He also shared his fond memory of participating in the 1962 education movement.

Special guest of the progamme, Professor Mihir Dev termed the victory of Bangladesh as the victory India. "Bangladesh is the only country of this Subcontinent that has a Victory Day," said Mihir Dev, who recited several poems of Shamsur Rahman at the event.

"According to Bangladeshi Premier Sheikh Hasina, Tripura is the pilgrimage of Bangladesh's Liberation War. The victory of Bangladesh is the victory of all the freedom loving people of the world," said special discussant Swapan Bhattacharya.

Md. Shakhawat Hossain, Assistant High Commissioner of Agartala, thanked all echoing the spirit of Liberation War and paid homage to all who brought victory for Bangladesh. In the morning session of the programme, Shakhawat Hossain hoisted the flag of Bangladesh with the rendition of National Anthem. He along with first secretary Md. Moniruzzaman and second secretary Iqbal Hossain read out the messages of State Minister for Foreign Affairs, Foreign Minister, Prime Minister and the President of Bangladesh.

Theatre troupe Padatik Natya Sangsad (Bangladesh) Chief Selim SH Chowdhury presented a replica of boat made of brass to Assistant High Commissioner. He also presented the National Flag of Bangladesh to Pabitra Kar while Shakhawat Hossain and Pabitra Kar presented the featured artistes of the event bouquets and victory memorials.

The cultural part featured patriotic songs performance by Bangladeshi singers – Nargis Chowdhury and Azhar Kishor, and Pushpita Chakrabarty of Agartala. Nargis Chowdhury set off the musical soiree with a Tagore song "Sarthok Janam Amar" while Azhar sang "Teer Hara Ei Dheu-er Sagar" and Pushpita rendered "Shob Kota Janala Khuley Dao Na".

Pabitra Kar also inaugurated a photography exhibition on Liberation War-based theatre productions and some selective theatre productions of post-independent Bangladesh that were on display at the venue. The displayed photos are from the collection of Bangladeshi playwright Babul Biswas and with courtesy from Bangladesh Theatre Archives.

Padatik Natya Sangsad Bangladesh staged their acclaimed production "Poramati" at the event. Unlike other traditional theatre productions on Liberation War with regard to their stories and presentations, "Poramati" zooms in on the mistrust and mutual doubt that recurrently appears as the philosophical doctrines like existentialism and absurdity.

Foisal Ahmed, Kamruzzaman Pavel, Al Amin, Faruk Faysal Duke, Mahmuda Akter Lita and Kamal Hossain played different roles in the play.
