The essence of Victory Day
2016-12-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/events/the-essence-victory-day-1331392

The Victory Day of Bangladesh has been one of the biggest national celebrations of the country for a long time, but one would feel the festivities have sort of lost character. The concerts, rallies and congregation of a massive crowd around the Dhaka University area have become fairly generic to other national celebrations. Chhayanaut, who initiated The Borshoboron programmes of the Bangla New Year back in 1967 that has become arguably the most signature cultural event of the country, last year took up the Victory Day as an occasion to celebrate, and in collaboration with Dhaka University, are already showing signs of turning it into a fitting celebration of Bangladesh's emergence on the world map.

The programme, held at the central playground of Dhaka University, was spot on in terms of the mood and content, a refreshing change from the other hullabaloo. It opened with the National Anthem and an address by cultural icon, Chhayanaut founder Dr. Sanjida Khatun. A number of educational institutes, from universities to English medium schools, joined in the chorus songs this year, as the Manipuri dance department of Chhayanaut presented energetic dance pieces. Songs like "Mora Jhonjhar Moto Uddam" and "Durgom Giri Kantar Moru" set the mood, while a number of noted artistes performed solos and duets – Chandana Mazumdar, Sharmin Sathi Islam, Nasima Shaheen and Shaheen Samad, who sang a new song written especially for the programme, titled "Ei Prithibi-ta Jodi Hoy". Liaquat Ali Lucky recited Syed Shamsul Haq's "Brahmaputer Proti", while Nritya Nandan, Nrityam Nrityasheelan Kendra, Jago Art Centre and Brotochari perfoemd dance pieces along with the songs and poetry. Zahirul Haq Khan interjected the performances with slogans of "Joy Bangla", and the programme ended with the artistes and audience once again singing the National Anthem.
