Plaques with Razakar's name removed
2017-02-07T00:00:00+06:00 | A Correspondent, Magura
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/plaques-razakars-name-removed-1356976

The local administration yesterday demolished the plaques of three set-ups named after Chand Ali Shikder, a notorious Razakar (collaborator of the Pakistan occupation forces during the Liberation War).

The demolished plaques were on Chand Ali Shikder Road in Binodpur union, Chand Ali Memorial at Nani Bala High School in the same area and a building of Binodpur Degree College in Mohammadpur upazila of Magura.

Chand Ali Shikder is accused of killing 12 freedom fighters in the area during the Liberation War.

A team from the administration led by Mohammadpur Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) Shaheen Hossain arranged breaking the name plaques yesterday afternoon.

As per the list prepared by the local government ministry, there are 32 roads named after the anti-liberation people in the country and four of them are in Magura district, said local freedom fighters and officials.

Those in Magura district are: Mokhlesur Rahman Road from Chowrangi crossing to Diana crossing, Habibur Rahman Road from Chowrangi crossing to Natun Bazar area, Wazed Ali Khan Road in Abalpur area in the municipality and the road named after Chand Ali Shikder at Binodpur of Mohammadpur.

The High Court on December 6 last year ordered the administration to demolish all the plaques of roads and installations named after anti-liberation people in different parts of the country within 60 days.

"I removed the name plaques following directive from the local government ministry," said Mohammadpur UNO Shaheen Hossain.

The freedom fighters have breathed a sigh of relief after the demolition of the plaques with names of an anti-liberation person, said Binodpur union Muktijodda Sangsad commander Abdur Razzak Mondal.

He hoped that the roads and installations will now be named after freedom fighters.

Muktijoddha Sangsad's Magura district unit commander Mollah Nabuyat Ali said the administration should immediately remove all other plaques of roads named after the anti-liberation people.
