Reminiscence of days of 1952
2017-02-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Jhenidah
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/reminiscence-days-1952-1362472

“In my twilight years, I am still invited at Ekushe February programmes every year. It gives me great satisfaction to see February 21 observed as International Mother Language Day,” said Language Movement veteran Md Nurul Islam Khan alias Hydar, sitting at his residence at Arappur village in the district town.

"I got involved in the Language Movement in 1952 at the age of 17 when I was a student of Class X at the local English High School (now Jhenidah Government Boys' School)," Hyder, now 80, said recalling the memory of his activities during the turbulent days.

Student leaders Enamul Haque Koton and Anwar Zahid from Dhaka went to Jhenidah started organising the local students for the movement. Golzer Hossain played a vital role there. Renowned school teacher Murari Mohan Ghoshal helped the students to form a 21-member committee titled 'Chhatra Sangram Parishad' with Golzer Hossain and Anwar Zahid as president and general secretary. School teacher Dhirendra Nath Sarker was also in the committee.

"Awami League leader and renowned physician Dr K Ahmed and his wife schoolteacher Monwara Khatun encouraged us. We used their house for poster writing and other purposes. Jahid Hasan Musa and Amir Hossain Malitha also played key role in language movement in Jhenidah," Hyder said.

On February 19, the committee members started convincing the government officials to keep their offices shut to press home the demand for Bangla as one of the state languages.

They also launched a campaign to motivate students to join the Language Movement.

When they arrived near Siddiqia Madrasa in the town to call the students to participate in the procession boycotting the classes, a teacher and some students barred their  way.

On February 21, a huge procession led by Anwar Zahid and Golzer Hossain was brought out in the town. Amulya Kumar of Krishna Nagarpara got engaged in drumbeating to attract the people's attention and motivate them to join the procession.

Hydar, however, expressed concern, saying that now a large section of the students are too much involved with political parties and many of them are staying away from the basic ideals of learners.
