1971 Genocide: PM blasts Pakistan for spreading false info
2017-02-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/1971-genocide-pm-blasts-pakistan-spreading-false-info-1364506

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday blasted Pakistan for spreading false and fabricated information about genocide committed during the Liberation War in 1971.

“Recently, it has been seen that Pakistan's conspiracy against Bangladesh is going on. They have published a book where they used captions under the pictures of genocide saying that freedom fighters had committed it. This propaganda is not acceptable to anyone.” she said.

The PM was addressing a function marking the distribution of the Ekushey Padak, 2017, organised by the cultural affairs ministry at Osmani Memorial Auditorium.

A book titled “Creation of Bangladesh: Myths Exploded”, authored by Junaid Ahmad and published in Pakistan, has been handed over to the Bangladesh High Commission in Pakistan which contained some false and fabricated information regarding genocide, number of martyrs and torture of women by the Pakistani army.

Hasina reiterated her pledge to declare March 25 as the Genocide Day in the country and persuade all to observe the day internationally as the Pakistan occupation forces on that day in 1971 carried out one of the worst genocide in history against the unarmed people of Bangladesh.

She said BNP Chairperson Khaleda Zia expressed doubt whether three million people were killed by the Pakistani force. “This number is not right,” the PM quoted Khaleda as saying.

“What can be more shameful than this?.. I don't know whether there is any link between the Pakistani propaganda and the statement of Khaleda Zia.”

The PM said there is no doubt that genocide was committed during the Liberation War and it was carried out by the Pakistani occupation forces. “Raising questions about the genocide and number of martyrs is very disgraceful.”

Congratulating the Ekushey Padak winners, Hasina hoped the award would inspire the future generation to accomplish major works for people.

She sought cooperation from all in collecting the names of learned and wise men who made contributions to various sectors and played a supporting role for the country's development so that the government could honour them properly.

Cabinet Secretary Shafiul Alam conducted the programme, with Minister for Cultural Affairs Asaduzzaman Noor in the chair.
