Readers draw inspiration from Liberation War books
2017-02-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Mathews Chiran
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/readers-draw-inspiration-liberation-war-books-1367809

It is important to know the true historical accounts of the Liberation War -- not only for the present generation but also for the future one.

It will inspire the youths to be patriotic and instil a sense of pride in them for the country.

This year's Ekushey book fair, like previous years, offers youths an opportunity to learn, revere and get motivated by the heroism and sacrifices of the countless who fought for safeguarding the country's independence and sovereignty.

The Suhrawardy Udyan premises of the fair is etched in history as it is the place where Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman made the historic March 7 speech in 1971 and called on the freedom-loving Bangalees to wage a decisive struggle against the Pakistani rulers.

"I still feel the same thrill and emotion while visiting the place,” said Mahbuba Ferdous, a media official. She also brought her daughter, Farial Ferdous, an SSC candidate. Farial bought “Ekattorer Dinguli” by Jahanara Imam.

Almost all the publishers brought out books on the Liberation War, including novels, research-based books and memorabilia. “MuktiJuddho Ponji” by Muntassir Mamoon and Hasina Ahmed from Kotha publication; “Roktey Jege Othe”, a regional history of Sirajganj by Imtiaz Shamim; “Ekatorrer Kanagoli” by Asif Siddiqi Deepto from Rodela publication; and “Ekattor o Muktijudha Paribar” by Aolia Khanam from Sahittyakotha publication, were in high demand.

Dr Nuzhat Chowdhury, daughter of martyred intellectual Dr Abdul Alim Chowdhury, also published a book titled “E Lorai Anibarja Chilo” from Maola Brothers publication.

Also, novels and stories based on the war including “Jochna O Jononir Golpo” by Humayun Ahmed, “Amar Bondhu Rashed” by Prof Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, “Nishiddho Loban” by Syed Shamsul Haque, “Maa” by Anisul Hoque and “Rifle, Roti, Aurat” by Prof Anwar Pasha, were still inspiring booklovers.

Parents were also buying books on the Liberation War for their children so that they can grow up with its spirit.

Many were seen buying “Mukijudder Kishor Galpo” by Selina Hossain, “Smritir Patay Saat Bir Shrestha” by Md Julfiqar Ali and “Rudra Kishorer Juddha” by Sarif Mahbubul Alam for their children.

Rashed Ullah, a private job holder, brought his daughter Samia Aktar Maria to the fair yesterday. “I wanted to familiarise her with our history,” he said, adding, “Even I need to know about the war in details.” He bought “Bangaleer Muktijuddho o Andalan” by Samsul Alam Sayed.

“As demand for the books on the Liberation War is increasing, we are trying to publish quality books for the readers,” said Rohib Ahsan of Srabon publication.

He said university students and researchers mostly buy books on the history of the war, whereas others prefer novels or short stories on the subject.

Meanwhile, Sahida Parvin Shikha's “Bangladesher Sramik Prasanga” from Bangla Dhoritri publication was unveiled on the Suhrawardy Udyan premises of the book fair yesterday. Young writer Shiblee Noman's short story collection "Kolikal" (Dark Age) is selling at the stall of Platform.
