London 1971 photography exhibits in Sylhet
2017-03-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Dwoha Chowdhury
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/exhibition/london-1971-photography-exhibits-sylhet-1368787

Hundreds of people at the 'London 1971' exhibition at Mohammad Ali Gymnasium in Sylhet  learnt with fascination about the many unsung heroes  of the Liberation War of Bangladesh through a display of memorabilia from  London back in 1971.

The 'London 1971' exhibition that concluded on Monday evening was organised by Project London 1971 in association with Ministry of Cultural Affairs and British Council in Bangladesh.

The exhibition presented around 100 photographs, British newspaper cuttings with the headlines, publicity leaflets and many other throwbacks to the Liberation War of 1971.

The exhibits transported viewers to an era when Bangladeshi expatriates, Freedom Fighters and the British staged demonstrations to gather international support for the cause of Liberation.

These moments were captured by British photographer Roger Gwynn and Bangladeshi photographer Yousuf Chowdhury.

During the inaugural session on Friday afternoon, Former Supreme Court Justice AHM Shamsuddin Choudhury Manik was present as chief guest and former Bangladesh Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the UN Dr. AK Abdul Momen inaugurated the exhibit.

Justice AHM Shamsuddin Choudhury Manik, who was also an organiser of the Liberation War from abroad said during the inauguration that the exhibition took him back to the days of 1971.

He also venerably spoke on the movement from abroad stating that many countries fighting for years for liberation are deprived due to lack of global support while Bangladesh back in 1971 got the global recognition for people who whole heartedly supported the Liberation War from abroad.

Dr. AK Abdul Momen said the expatriates along with many foreigners may not have witnessed the battle field but they were Freedom Fighters nevertheless.

He said these unsung heroes must be identified and honoured by the government for their dedication to the cause of the Liberation war of 1971.

During the inaugural session, Jalal Ahmed, additional secretary of finance ministry and Candal Robbins, art director of British Council were present.  Fazlul Kabir Tuhin, chairman of Project London 1971 chaired the inauguration.
