Rediscovering UK expats' role in 1971
2017-03-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/london-expats-role-1971-recalled-1370560

Thousands of Bangladeshi expatriates were crowding outside the Heathrow airport in London to welcome and receive their hero Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on January 8, 1972. It was indeed a pleasant gathering as the father of the nation went there soon after getting released from Pakistan's prison.

Bangabandhu arrived at the airport at the dawn of January 8. In the evening, he held a crowded press conference at Claridge Hotel, for building public opinion and raising the “Bangladesh Fund”.

Former secretary and ambassador Mohiuddin Ahmed still recalls that moment with Bangabandhu. He narrated how the expatriate Bangladeshis and the British government greeted the great leader in the United Kingdom (UK) after Bangladesh's independence.

Mohiuddin Ahmed, who was a second secretary at then Pakistan High Commission in the UK, shared his memory and recalled contributions of his fellow Bangladeshis for the independence at a photography exhibition titled “London 1971: Unsung Heroes of the Bangladesh's Liberation War,” launched by British Council at its main office on Fuller Road in the capital yesterday.

The former ambassador recalled the outstanding contributions of Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury who played a leading diplomatic role to build support among the international communities for the Liberation War.

Introducing his fellows who worked with him in the UK during the war, he said the Bangladeshis were fighting for democracy and human rights, which the UK government cherished.

“Finally, the tacit support of the British government…. it was not open as it didn't recognise the government of Bangladesh but supported. And that was very strong support against the Pakistan government,” Mohiuddin said.

Addressing as chief guest, Foreign Minister Abul Hassan Mahmood Ali said the relations between peoples of Bangladesh and Britain went back a long way and this relations had matured over the years.

He thanked Ujjal Das, initiator of the Project London 1971, and urged him to bring more stories of the Liberation War to the young generation.

Deputy British High Commissioner David Ashley said the British-Bangladesh relation was not just about governments and high commissions, it was also about shared history, trade and culture.

“We are proud that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman returned to Bangladesh on an RAF comet provided by the British government,” he recalled.

Ujjal Das shared his journey towards developing the archive of London 1971, while British Council's Director Barbara Wickham, its acting arts director Kendall Robbins, and exhibition curator Shehzad Chowdhury, among others, also spoke.

The exhibition features more than 40 rare photographs brought together by Ujjal Das. The exhibitions and events are all open and free to the public and will continue throughout this month.
