Liberation War songs at Joy Bangla Concert on Mar 7
2017-03-03T21:40:29+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/online/liberation-war-songs-at-joy-bangla-concert-march-7-1370464

In the turbulent days of 1971, Sujeo Shyam and his fellow musicians created songs for Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra to give the morale of freedom fighters a boost and keep the hope for an independent Bangladesh alive.

Forty-six years after, five of such songs, rarely rendered since 1971, will be presented before an audience of this new generation at this edition Joy Bangla concert to be held at the Army Stadium in Dhaka.

With a call to roar like March 7, 1971, favourite bands of youths will offer the rendition during their turn. In addition to this, each will perform their own renditions of songs related to the independence.

Popular bands--- Warfaze, Chircut, Arbovirus, Lalon, Cryptic Fate, Nemesis, Shironamhin and Shunno--- will perform at the concert.

To transcend the limit of entertainment, four inspiring Audio Visuals (AVs), --- Pride, Courage, Inspiration and Trust---- on mentioned themes will be screened.

Contents for all the AVs are compiled from moments of the historic March 7 speech by Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Moreover, another key attraction of this edition is the screening of the colourised version of March 7 speech - a transformation from black and white into colour.

Free registration for tickets began on February 27 and interested persons are requested to visit the website: ticket.youngbangla.org

Like last two years, renowned musicians will open the show by conducting a grand orchestra playing our National Anthem.

Country's youth platform Young Bangla, under the auspices of Centre for Research and Information (CRI), is organizing this music extravengza to inspire the youth of today through the words of the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's historic 7 March speech.

"The concert seeks to imbue the youths of the country with that timeless message using the universal medium of music, culture and arts", said Sabbir Bin Shams, Executive Director of CRI.

The concert will be staged between 4.30pm and 10:00pm on March 7 while gates of the venue will remain open from 2:00pm for entrance of audience.
