INSTILLING THE SPIRIT OF LIBERATION WAR
2017-03-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/event/instilling-the-spirit-liberation-war-1372876

To instil the spirit of the Liberation War while revisiting the timeless melodies that inspired numerous Freedom Fighters in the battlefield of 1971, Young Bangla organised a “Joy Bangla Concert 2017” at Army Stadium on historic 7th March when on the this day in 1971, the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman delivered a rousing speech, calling upon his compatriots to free the country from Pakistani occupation.

Several prominent and popular bands -- Spondon 72, Cryptic Fate, Arbovirus, Shunno, Nemesis, Shironamhin, Lalon, Chirkutt and Warfaze -- performed Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendra songs along with their respective scores at the concert.

The emcees -- Iresh Zaker and Maria Noor – welcomed all and introduced the featured bands prior to their performances. IUB students set off the concert rendering the National Anthem. Spondon 72 performed “Joy Bangla Banglar Joy”. They also sang a Maijhbhandari song “Ishkool Kuilachhey Rey Maula” and the song “Hishabi Mahajon”.

Cryptic Fate then came on stage to start off with the songs “Muktir Ek-i Poth Shongram”, Teer Hara Ei Dheu-er Sagar”, “Cholo Bangladesh”, “Bhorer Opekkha”, “Bhoboghurey”, “Protibaad” and “Akromon”.

Arbovirus began their performance with the song “Orey Shon Rey Tora Shon”. Their repertoire included “Amra Korbo Joy”, “School”, “Omanush”, “Hariye Jao” and “Jaalo Aagun Jaalo”.

[gallery id="1372873"][/gallery]

Shunno along with popular singer Elita Karim started off with presenting a Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendra song “Aj Rono Sajey” and a folk song, “Amar Mon Tore Parlam Na Bujhaite”. Shunno's repertoire included “Joy Bangla”. They later performed the numbers “Shoto Asha”, “Shono Mohajon”, “Bedona” and “Godhulir Oparey”.

Nemesis rendered the songs -- “Rokto Diye Naam Likhechhi”, “Joyoddhwoni”, “Obocheton”, “Bir” and “Gonojowar” while Shironamhin performed “Jonmo Amar Dhonno Holo”, “Ekti Phool”, “Ebar Hashi Mukhey”, “Bondho Janala”, “Bullet Kingba Kobita” and “Shonshon Jodio Kashbon”.

Noted actor elocutionist Jayanta Chattopadhyay recited poems on Liberation War. The recitation was followed by the airing of Bangabandhu's historic 7th March speech.

The band Lalon rendered “Rokto Chai”, “Shomoy Gele”, “Khepa”, “Gurur Choron” and “Opaar” while Chirkutt performed “Nonggor Tolo Tolo”, “Purba Digontey Surjo Uthechhey”, “Dhono Dhanno Puspho Bhora”, “Jadur Shohor”, “Khazna” and “Tarunno”.

Warfaze wrapped up the concert performing the songs “Bijoy Nishan”, “Joy Bangla Boley Agey Baro”, “Jibon Dhara”, “Boshey Achhi”, “Moharaaj” and “Oshamajik”.
