Mother waits for martyred son's recognition
2017-03-24T00:00:00+06:00 | S Dilip Roy
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/mother-waits-martyred-sons-recognition-1380583

Forty five years after the country's final victory against the Pakistan occupation forces, mother of a martyred freedom fighter is still waiting for his recognition.

The woman, Firoza Bewa, 78, lost her husband Abdul Aziz 25 years ago and is now living with her two sons Harunur Rashid and Abul Kalam at their home on Fire Service Road in Lalmonirhat town.

She has appealed to the government for recognition of her son as a martyred freedom fighter.

Firoza and her family earlier lived at Kalipur village in Titas upazila (former Daudkandi upazila) of Comilla and they settled in Lalmonirhat town after the independence.

Inspired by his maternal uncle Motiur Rahma Bir Uttam, Abdul Baten Shamim, son of Firoza Bewa, joined the Liberation War at the age of 21.

He fought as a member of Langolbond camp in Narayanganj under Sector No 2. His body number was 036.

Shamim received bullet injury in the battle against Pakistan occupation army at Narayanganj Mill Area-2 in the morning on December 15 in 1971 and his co-fighters admitted him to Dhaka Medical College Hospital. After one month of treatment he died at the hospital on January 14 in 1972.

The martyred freedom fighter was buried at Azimpur graveyard in Dhaka.

“Before his death, Shamim told us that he fought for the country's independence and killed many Pakistani soldiers and Rajakars. I have no photograph of him but his face always floats in my mind. I have his death certificate given by Ramna Police Station and a slip testifying his burial at Azimpur graveyard,” said a tearful Firoza Bewa.

“In February this year, I submitted documents to the Titas upazila freedom fighters' verification committee for recognition of my son as a martyred freedom fighter. Many co-fighters of my son were present during the verification," she said.

Firoza's son Abul Kalam said, “Our mother always prays for the departed soul of her martyred son Shamim. Sometimes she cries, recalling his memory.”
