Donate Tk 10,000 to build Liberation War Museum
2015-09-05T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/donate-tk-10000-build-liberation-war-museum-138223

The Liberation War Museum has launched a three-month long special fundraising campaign to complete the construction of the museum building.

Trustees of the museum at a press conference at the under-construction building in the capital's Agargaon, urged all citizens of the country, particularly the youth, to participate in the initiative.

Some other major works like interior designing and gallery work will need three more months.

Trustees -- Dr Sarwar Ali, Tariq Ali, and Sara Zaker -- and a member of the finance committee, Matin Chowdhury, among others, were present.

Reading out a written statement, Tariq Ali said the estimated cost of the building is Tk 102 crore.

Of the total amount, Tk 80 crore was raised from the public, including school students' donation. No foreign donation was sought or received, Ali read.

He said anybody can donate any amount.

A grant was sought from the government for completion of the building and hopefully a good portion of the remaining fund will come from it, he said.

"We want to encourage people to contribute even Tk 10,000 to buy a symbolic brick for the building. But we are willing to receive any sort of amount from the citizens," he said.

An endowment fund will be created with the public donation and earning from the fund would be used to maintain the expenses of the museum in future, he added.

Speakers said civil work of the six-storey building with three basements having the capacity to hold 106 cars, would be completed within this month.

"Hopefully within a few months we will able to shift the Liberation War Museum from Segun Bagicha to new complex in Agargaon," said Dr Sarowar Ali, while replying to a question.

"Younger generation has been playing a great role in preserving the history and image of the Liberation War. We want them to take part in this initiative," said Sara Zaker.

Those wishing to contribute may donate to account name: Construction of Liberation War Museum, account no: 1501101658637001, Brac Bank. Donations can also be sent through bKash: 01730600062.

Detailed information can be found on www.liberationwarmusueumbd.org
