Tale of unsung war heroes
2017-03-28T00:00:00+06:00 | ABM Aminul Islam
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/tale-unsung-war-heroes-1382386

The people of Goalgaon village in Bakshiganj upazila of the district, who were killed or injured in a mortar attack by the Pakistani army on November 14 in 1971, have not been recognised as martyrs or freedom fighters as the local administration is not aware of their contribution to the War of Liberation.

At around 7:00am, a mortar shell exploded in a corner of the village, killing six people and seven to eight cattle, and severely injuring six other people, witnesses said.

The deceased were Muzammel Haque, 50, Burhan Uddin, 35, Class VI student Nazrul Islam, Shahjamal, 8, Kulsum, 9, and her two-year-old brother Jabed Ali, said Nuruzzaman, son of Muzammel.

The injured are Noor Islam, 66, Amiul Haque, 62, Muja Ali, 70, Chan Mia, 60, Shamsul Alam and Mohammad Ilias.

Of them, Shamsul died 10 years ago and Ilias in 1982, said Nuruzzaman.

Their families are now surviving amid much hardship. They are not even under the social safety net, let alone getting recognition of their dear ones' martyrdom, family members of the deceased said.

Noor Islam, Amiul Haque, Muja Ali and Chan Mia are still suffering due to their injuries.

“I was an SSC candidate then, but could not study as we were very concerned about becoming victims of the indiscriminate firing by the occupation forces. Besides, we provided help to the freedom fighters,” said Noor, who received major injuries in the legs and stomach.

“I could not walk for four years. My 12 bighas of land had to be sold for my treatment,” he said, adding that he works as a security guard at a residence in Dhaka for 35 years.

Amiul also became landless after spending a huge amount of money for treatment. He has been maintaining his family by working as a bicycle mechanic, he said.

Injured Muja Ali and Chan Mia, who were farm labourers during the Liberation War, are still in the same position. They are in vulnerable condition as they cannot work with much energy due to their injuries, they said.

“What we had done during the war was our moral duty to make the land free from the occupation forces. Forty-six years have passed since we got the long cherished independence. But who cares about jobs for people like us?” they questioned.

Administrative officials do not know about the horrifying shell attack at the village, said Zahurul Haque Munshi Bir Pratik, who fought at Kamalpur in Bakshiganj under Sector-11 from October to December 4, when Kamalpur was freed from the occupation forces.

The people, who were killed and injured in the attack, should be recognised formally and given support for their sacrifice and heroic deeds during the War of Liberation, Zahurul added.

Jamalpur Deputy Commissioner Md Shahabuddin Khan said the people who embraced martyrdom and those who are still suffering due to their injuries in the November attack should be recognised, and their families must be given needed support.
