Towards independence
2017-03-28T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/law-our-rights/towards-independence-1382536

Theme of the 2017 World Autism Awareness Day (WAAD) is “Toward Autonomy and Self-Determination”. The theme is line with the spirit of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) which recognises the right of persons with disabilities to independence of person and to individual autonomy (article 3).

The 2017 WAAD observance is organised by the United Nations Department of Public Information and Department of Economic and Social Affairs. The WAAD observance, on 31 March 2017, will discuss policies and approaches being implemented with regard to guardianship and the path to self-determination and legal capacity of persons with autism.

Autism is a lifelong neurological condition that manifests during early childhood, irrespective of gender, race or socio-economic status. Autism is mainly characterised by its unique social interactions, non-standard ways of learning, keen interests in specific subjects, inclination to routines, challenges in typical communications and particular ways of processing sensory information. The rate of autism in all regions of the world is high and the lack of understanding has a tremendous impact on the individuals, their families and communities.

The stigmatization and discrimination associated with neurological differences remain substantial obstacles to diagnosis and therapies, an issue that must be addressed by both public policy-makers in developing nations, as well as donor countries.

Throughout its history, the United Nations family has celebrated diversity and promoted the rights and well-being of persons with disabilities, including children with learning differences and developmental disabilities. In 2008, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities entered into force, reaffirming the fundamental principle of universal human rights for all. Its purpose is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity. It is a solid tool to foster an inclusive and caring society for all and to ensure that all children and adults with autism can lead full and meaningful lives.

The United Nations General Assembly unanimously declared 2 April as World Autism Awareness Day (A/RES/62/139) to highlight the need to help improve the quality of life of those with autism so they can lead full and meaningful lives as an integral part of society.

The UN Secretary-General Mr. António Guterres is his message urged all to “play a part in changing attitudes toward persons with autism and in recognising their rights as citizens, who, like everyone else, are entitled to claim those rights and make decisions for their lives in accordance with their own will and preferences. Let us also renew our promise, engraved in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to leave no one behind and ensure that all people can contribute as active members to peaceful and prosperous societies. When persons with autism will enjoy equal opportunity for self-determination and autonomy, they will be empowered to make an even stronger positive impact on our shared future.”

Compiled by Law Desk (SOURCE: UN.ORG).
