War Crimes 1971: Probe agency gets documents on Moosa
2017-04-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/war-crimes-1971-probe-agency-gets-documents-moosa-1387639

Journalists Sagar Lohani and Probir Sikdar yesterday handed over some documents, which they deem to be evidence of war-time offences committed by controversial businessman Moosa bin Shamsher, to the investigation agency of the International Crimes Tribunal.

“We have requested them [investigators] to start a formal investigation against Moosa and take steps to arrest him so that he cannot obstruct the investigation,” Sagar Lohani said.

The 28-page document comprising mainly media reports was handed to Sanaul Huq, co-coordinator of the probe agency.

They also talked to the agency's Coordinator Abdul Hannan Khan.

They had collected media reports of the last 15 to 16 years, including Janakantha's report titled “Sei Rajakar” written by Probir Sikder.

“They [investigators] received our documents and assured us that they will complete the ongoing preliminary investigation as soon as possible,” Sagar said.

Contacted, Hannan Khan confirmed that the agency received the documents.

“We will follow the same procedure in this case that we have been following in other cases,” he said.

Earlier on March 29, Sanaul Huq said the agency had started looking into controversial businessman Moosa's alleged involvement in crimes committed during the 1971 Liberation War and that investigators would register a case against him if they found any evidence.

He, however, declined to give further details but invited journalists to give information about Moosa if they had any.

Sagar said they submitted the documents in response to the request from Sanaul.

In 2001, Bangla daily Janakantha ran a series of reports headlined “Sei Razakar” on alleged war criminals. Several parts of those reports have already been used as prosecution evidence in different war crimes cases.

Janakantha on March 24, 2001 ran a report on Moosa under the headline “Faridpurer 'Nula Moossai' Ekhon Dhakar Rahoshye Ghera Dhanyadhya Bebosaye Prince Moosa bin Shamsher” (Nula Moosa of Faridpur now Dhaka's mysterious rich businessman Prince Moosa bin Shamsher).

According to the report, Moosa, a man from Faridpur, was a close aide of Pakistani Maj Akram Koreshi and was involved in several crimes including killings during the Liberation War.

Contacted, Mosharraf Hossain, an office executive of Moosa's business company, told The Daily Star yesterday that Moosa would soon give his official reply.
