Photography exhibition on London 1971 starts at CU
2017-04-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Md Abbas
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/exhibition/photography-exhibition-london-1971-starts-cu-1388263

A three-day photography exhibition titled “Project London1971: Unsung Heroes of Those Windy Days” started at Chittagong University's Fine Arts Institute's Artist Rashid Chowdhury Gallery on Friday.

With an aim to spread the spirit of the Liberation War among the youths, the exhibition was organised by Project London 1971 with the support of British Council and Ministry of Cultural Affairs.

A total of 80 rare photographs, captured by British Photographer Roger Goyen and British born Bangladeshi Yusuf Chowdhury during those windy days of London in 1971's Bangladesh Liberation War.

Dr. AK Abdul Momen, former UN residential representative to Bangladesh, inaugurated the exhibition.

Speaking at the inaugural ceremony as Chief guest, Chittagong City Corporation Mayor (CCC) AJM Nasir Uddin said that a section of political leaders are spreading confusion among the youth of our country through providing false information about our Liberation War.

He hoped that such exhibitions can help the youth to know about the Liberation War to a greater extent.

Prof Emeritus Abdul Momen said that British Parliament members, politicians, journalists, social workers and students played a significant role by their protest for the independence of Bangladesh along with Bangalee expatriates, he added.

Presided over by CU Vice-Chancellor Prof Iftekhar Uddin Chowdhury, the inaugural ceremony was addressed by Ekattorer Ghatak Dalal Nirmul Committee's central General Secretary Kazi Mukul, its Finance Secretary Dr. Mamun Al Mahtab, PHP Family Chairman Sufi Mizanur Rahman and Swadhinata Chikitshak Parishad (Sachip) Joint General Secretary Prof Dr. Uttam Kumar Barua among others.

Talking to The Daily Star, Ujjal Das, who collected the photos, said that the city of London played a pivotal role during the days of making a new nation-state Bangladesh.

“We firmly believe that the series of initiatives undertaken by the 'Project London 1971' will inspire the newer generations present and upcoming.

A picture which was exhibited at the exhibition depicts a poster saying 'Stop Genocide, Recognise Bangladesh' which was captured at Trafalgar Square on August 1, 1971 in London.

The exhibition, open from 10am-8pm, ends today.
