1971 War Crimes: Verdict on 2 Kishoreganj men today
2017-04-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/1971-war-crimes-verdict-2-kishoreganj-men-today-1393102

The International Crimes Tribunal-1 is set to deliver judgement today in a case filed against two Kishoreganj men for allegedly committing crimes against humanity during the Liberation War in 1971.

The special court yesterday fixed the date, 40 days after the prosecution and the defence completed the closing arguments and the tribunal kept the case waiting for delivering verdict.

The accused -- Syed Mohammad Hussain alias Hossain, 64, younger brother of convicted war criminal Syed Hasan Ali, and Muhammad Moslem Pradhan, 66, -- are facing six charges.

Of them, Moslem is in jail and pleaded not guilty, while Hussain is on the run.

Wrapping up their arguments and rebuttal of defence arguments on March 7, the prosecution prayed for capital punishment of the accused saying they had proved all six charges.

The defence, however, said the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses were “not credible” and the prosecution had utterly failed to prove the charges. They prayed for acquittal of their clients.

Moslem of Kamarhati village in Nikli upazila was arrested on July 7, 2015 after the tribunal issued an arrest warrant for the duo. On the other side, Hussain left for Malaysia on May 21, 2014 and investigation began on November 13 that year, according to the tribunal's investigation agency.

Hussain was originally from Machihata village (Pir Bari) in Brahmanbaria Sadar upazila but had been living with his family in Kishoreganj Sadar upazila since 1936 as his father worked there, according to the investigators.

His father, Syed Musleh Uddin, was vice-president of the then East Pakistan unit of Pakistan Democratic Party (PDP) and chairman of the Peace Committee in Kishoreganj sub-division in 1971, the investigators added. Both PDP and Peace Committee worked against Bangladesh's independence.

Hussain was the commander of the Razakar force in Nikli upazila and was known as “Razakarer Daroga”, while his brother Syed Hassan commanded the Razakars in Tarail upazila. Moslem was a Razakar member and Hussain's associate, according to the prosecution.

The tribunal on May 9 last year framed charges against the duo and the prosecution produced 23 witnesses to prove the charges. The defence produced one witness.
