New generation should know the real history of our Liberation War
2017-05-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Pallab Bhattacharya
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/new-generation-should-know-the-real-history-our-liberation-war-1410847

Director Morshedul Islam, one of the torch-bearers of story-driven cinema in Bangladesh, is happy but not “totally satisfied” by the fact that his feature film “Anil Bagchir Ekdin”, whose story is set in the Liberation War of Bangladesh, won National Film Awards 2015 in six different categories. In an interview with The Daily Star a day after the National Film Awards for 2015 were announced, he also spoke about his next feature film, “Ankhi o Taar Bondhura” based on a novel by Md Zafar Iqbal.

Winning national awards is nothing new for you as a director. But was this award different from previous ones?

Morshedul Islam: Although I have received national awards before in the best film category, this is the first time I got the award as the best director. Of course I am happy, but not totally satisfied. I believe, in terms of merit, the film should have gotten a few more awards in some other categories .Especially Aref Syed, who acted the role of Anil Bagchi, really deserved the best actor award. Anyway, I am happy that at least my film won awards in six categories.

Why did you choose Humayun Ahmed's story for the film? What is special about it?

Morshedul Islam: The story truly depicts the inner spirit of our great Liberation War – secularism. The story was very touchy too. In today's Bangladesh, it is necessary to recall again and again for what we fought to bring about an independent country in 1971.

Since “Anil Bagchir Ekdin” is based on the Liberation War, what according to you is the central message of your film for the young generation in Bangladesh today, especially when there is a rise in radicalisation of youth?

Morshedul Islam: Our new generation should know the real history of our Liberation War. They should know that three million people gave their lives in 1971 for establishing a country with equal rights for every human being, notwithstanding religion, class or colour. We are still very far from that goal, but we must surely achieve it.

Could you share with us about your next feature film project?

Morshedul Islam: Right now, I am making a feature film for children and young adults, titled “Ankhi O Taar Bondhura”. Based on a novel by Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, the story is about a visually-impaired girl. The shooting of the film is almost completed. I hope that the film will be released next December.

As a filmmaker, how do you see yourself having evolved, since making "Chaka” in 1994?

Morshedul Islam: “Chaka” was a very serious film. The message was universal. The approach was very humanistic. Its inner philosophy was very strong. Relationship of human beings and nature, relationship between dead and living were the subjects of the film. Simplicity was its main character. But I like to make films on different subjects, with different tastes. After “Chaka”, I made 'Dipu Number Two', a film for children. The film was very popular with children as well as the adult audience. I made some films on our Liberation War. Some of those films were popular too, like “Amar Bondhu Rashed”. I enjoy making films with different tastes. “Chaka” may be the film which was appreciated by critics and won some important international awards, but I think my other films are equally important.
