Find army leadership having Liberation War spirit: PM
2017-07-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/find-army-leadership-having-liberation-war-spirit-pm-1430878

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday asked senior army officials to find out capable and qualified leadership for the force having the spirit of Liberation War.

“Staying above everything and through your analyses…, you'll have to find out qualified leadership having patriotism and belief in the great Liberation War,” she said.

The prime minister said this while inaugurating the five-day “Army Headquarters Selection Board 2017” held at Dhaka Cantonment.

To establish and consolidate democracy in a country, Hasina said a disciplined and strong army plays a very supplementary role.

“Leadership has to be placed on those qualified officers who are well-educated, workable, intelligent, and above all strongly determined to consolidate the democracy,” she said.

The premier said loyalty to leadership, professional efficiency, field-level success, discipline, honesty, trustworthiness and credibility are also important for promotion.

She expressed satisfaction over the introduction of modern TRACE (Tabulated Record and Comparative Evaluation) method for the promotion of army officials.

Hasina expressed her confidence over the wisdom and righteousness of senior army officials, and hoped that they could be successful in selecting competent leadership based on principles.

She asked the selection board to take into consideration the leadership quality, professional excellence, field-level success, integrity and obedience of the officers for promotion.

Hasina said the army's role is indispensable in maintaining peace and stability as well as combating militancy.

She said the government has undertaken various steps for the development, expansion, and welfare of the army. Also, steps have been taken for the welfare of their families, she said.

The PM said a process is underway to construct five dental colleges and five nursing institutes for the Bangladesh Army.

The work for the construction of the country's lone burn unit and plastic surgery hospital has been given to Bangladesh Army. It will be one of the best hospitals in South Asia, she said.

Hasina said the salary structure of the members of the armed forces has been refixed keeping consistency with that of the civil administration.

The works on the “Jalsiri” housing project for the army is going on at a quick pace, she said, adding that the project will help strengthen mental strength of the officers.
