Sector 7
2017-08-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Mormee Mahtab
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/eating-out/sector-7-1441564

The terrible traffic from Uttara to southern parts of Dhaka is a living nightmare and no less of a battle. This however is not about a war zone, but a restaurant located at Sector 7 of Uttara.

The entrepreneur behind this establishment is Kamrun Nahar, a business graduate who decided to venture into the restaurant business, and her effort has now been successfully launched as "Sector 7".

Kamrun categorises her brainchild as a 'multi-cuisine, fine dine' restaurant. "My chief goal was to create something that has never been done in Uttara before. Most of the customers who live here have to travel a long way to other more known areas to spend some quality time," she said.

Her effort was to bring a quality dining experience for the people of Uttara.

As one enters the restaurant, soft light greets the eyes and the décor done in all white creates a soothing experience. With fine seating arrangements, a beautiful lamp hanging above every white table, the mellow walls show exquisite taste on part of the designer.

Their menu consists of a variety of cuisines that start from Thai, Chinese, Continental, South Indian, and Indian, to some everyday Italian items like pasta and pizza. But the main attraction is the unique Live Seafood Station having lobsters, prawns, oysters, fresh salmon, crab, etc. One can simply pick what his palate desires and the food is cooked live!

The restaurant has provisions for staging live music and also offers a soundproof playground for children to play in. There is a party centre, adjoined to it, which stands on the same floor of the building. With a capacity of some 200 guests it is suitable for holding various events.

Besides the long list of various cuisines, there are set menus, which can be quickly prepared and served, targeting corporate clients with limited lunch hours. The dishes come in affordable prices and food quality. With no compromise on hygiene, each and every dish is prepared with great care and expertise. Adhering to the comfort of their customers, they also have offers and package deals at affordable prices for students. And on Thursdays and Fridays they provide exciting buffet offers.

Sector 7 is a great gastronomical experience for anyone who wants to enjoy some quality time with good food, and great music.

The restaurant is located at Rajuk Razib Cosmo Shopping Complex, Plot #71, 3rd floor, Uttara. For reservations call +088-01711-357129.

Photo courtesy: Sector 7
