English Language Carnival held at Ideal School and College
2017-08-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Sadi Mohammad Shahnewaz
https://www.thedailystar.net/in-focus/english-language-carnival-held-ideal-school-and-college-1446754

Regardless of how brilliant and resourceful a student might be, the fear of communicating in English is still a prevalent hurdle that many students have to cross. With this in mind, Motijheel Ideal School and College hosted the first ever "IELC National English Language Carnival," where Star Youth of  The Daily Star was the media partner.

It was essentially an Olympiad designed to help students showcase and improve their English language skills in a fun and interactive way. The event was organised by the Ideal English Language Club, who worked for days to make this event a reality. "We often see many talented students not achieving their full potential because of their reluctance to speak or write in English," says Anik Saha, the Vice-President of the club. "When we were discussing what we could add to this event, student-interaction and fun were our focal points. We have many programmes today that will surely encourage the participants to learn English in a fun way," he adds.

The Language Carnival took place on the 4th and 5th August, 2017, with different events taking place on each day. Various activities followed the Opening Ceremony. 'Spell Master', which resembled the popular 'Spelling Bee' format, was exceptionally engaging when it came to student interactivity. There were English Olympiad, Brainstorming session, Wall-Magazine display, 'Fiction War' and a myriad of things to do. The carnival welcomed students from all major schools in Dhaka, and among the diversity of characters, the students had shared a similar fondness of English Language.

The second day of the festival had continued with Spell Master and had included an Extempore Speech, where students had to give an impromptu speech on selected topics. The segment provided a very entertaining and creative push to not only the ones who participated, but also to the ones who watched. The day, however, had mostly been designed to judge and reward the students for their prowess in different sections of the carnival. The final formalities were followed by the musical performances in the ending ceremony, where everyone including the volunteers let loose and enjoyed the performances by talented young musicians. "We want to keep on trying to engage students in learning environments beyond their textbooks, and hopefully we can continue this carnival for years to come," says Anik. By the looks of it, both the English Language Club and the Carnival are here to stay.
