Handle Biranganas with care
2017-08-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/handle-biranganas-care-1455124

Speakers at a workshop in the capital yesterday stressed the need for comprehensive guidelines to conduct research on Biranganas (war heroines), write stories about them and collect their testimonies.

The issue of Biranganas has to be dealt with utmost care and ethics taking into consideration the sensitivity of the issue, they said.

Research Initiatives Bangladesh (RIB) in collaboration with the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs and Durham University, UK, organised the workshop in Cirdap auditorium.

Organisers said the workshop was arranged in light of a book, “The Spectral Wound: Sexual Violence, Public Memories and the Bangladesh War of 1971”. It was a follow-up of similar workshop held in November, 2016.

Both the events aimed to come up with a set of recommendations to be placed before the government for making the guidelines, they said. Cover jacket of the book was unveiled during the yesterday's workshop.

At the yesterday's programme, Nayanika Mookherjee, the author of the book and a faculty of anthropology department of Durham University, placed a set of 16 recommendations before the government for the proposed guidelines.

She said while collecting testimonies and conducting research on Biranganas, a researcher or interviewer should not focus only on the violent episode they faced during the 1971 Liberation War. Rather, priority should be given on their life at present, she said.

In addition, interview of only those should be taken who are willing to participate, she added.

RIB Executive Director Meghna Guhathakurta stressed the need for collaborative work between the government and the non-government organisations on the issue.

Speaking as the chief guest, Aparup Chowdhury, secretary of liberation war affairs ministry, said at present there are 185 gazetted Biranganas in the country while 65 more are waiting to be enlisted.

Alongside ensuring their monthly allowances, the government is also working on to prepare guidelines to deal with the sensitive issue, he said.

Rights activist Hameeda Hossain, RIB Chairman Shamsul Bari and Liberation War Museum Trustee Ziauddin Tariq Ali, among others, spoke.
