Tales of persecution led Taramon Bibi to '71 war
2014-03-08T00:00:37+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/tales-of-persecution-led-taramon-bibi-to-71-war-14622

For Taramon Bibi, it was a big question why people, mostly women and children, were crossing into India in large numbers. As the refugees waited by the roadside for the rest to catch up, she talked to some. The stories they told of the Pakistani army committing atrocities on innocent civilians moved her and made her angry. The 14-year-old girl of Kurigram decided to fight against the Pakistanis. Despite objections from her family, Taramon agreed to cook for a camp of the freedom fighters. “I not only cooked for them. As I showed courage, I was trained to operate rifles and sten guns,” said Taramon Bibi Bir Protik, a guerrilla freedom fighter, who took part in a number of battles against the Pakistani forces in 1971. She was one of the three women who were conferred “Agrani Bank Nari Shommanona-2014” on the eve of International Women's Day today. At the ceremony, speakers said that in independent Bangladesh, women constituted half the population but were still not given equal privileges due to the patriarchal mindset. Against all odds, there are many women who demonstrated their extra-ordinary courage and confidence that lifted them to a different height, they said. Jatiya Sangsad Speaker Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury, Bangladesh's first female Everest conqueror Nishat Majumder, and Taramon Bibi Bir Protik are three of them. In recognition of their works, Agrani Bank Ltd conferred them the honour. Each of them was given a crest and Tk 1 lakh during a programme at the capital's Ruposhi Bangla Hotel. “The people like Taramon Bibi brought us independence,” said Shirin Sharmin. “We are here today because of them." “We got independence…we now want a golden Bangla,” said Taramon Bibi.

Addressing as chief guest, Bangladesh Bank Governor Dr Atiur Rahman said, “True independence would be achieved only when men and women have equal opportunities for economic activities.” Agrani Bank Chairman Prof Khandker Bazlul Haque said both men and women need to change the patriarchal mindset for ensuring equal rights for themselves. Women's leader Mahfuza Khanam and Agrani Bank Managing Director and CEO Syed Abdul Hamid also addressed the programme. Meanwhile, Square Consumer Products Ltd yesterday awarded six women "Radhuni Kritimati Sammanana 2012-13" for their outstanding achievements in journalism, social work and entrepreneurship, marking International Women's Day. At a programme in a city hotel, Vice Chairman of Square Group Ratna Patra said the award would inspire many women to advance in the future. Hazera Sheuli of Chittagong and Yasmin Reema of Comilla received the award for their dedication in journalism, while Ira Haque of Rangpur and Farmoza Momotaz of Kishoreganj got it for social work. Papri Bose of Comilla and Tahmina Khatun of Mymensingh were awarded for entrepreneurship and job creation.
