Unesco recognition for Bangabandhu's 7th March speech
2017-11-02T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/editorial/unesco-recognition-bangabandhus-7th-march-speech-1485145

We feel very proud that Unesco has recognised Bangabandhu's historic 7th March speech as a world documentary heritage. Bangabandhu's awe-inspiring speech was a pivotal moment in the history of our liberation movement, and we in Bangladesh, have always felt it should be shared with the world. That the speech which galvanised our independence movement has been granted recognition at the international level is a momentous occasion for us. We congratulate Unesco for according to the speech what was long overdue: its universality.

The 7th March speech holds a special place in our history and in the hearts of the people of Bangladesh. For it is this very speech that set the tone for the Liberation War—which would begin 18 days later—and inspired millions of Bengalis to prepare for war. Bangabandhu, through one of the greatest speeches of all time, encapsulated the plight of the Bengali people and provided the final direction in the struggle for freedom which would soon go on to result in an independent country. But as we know, this freedom came at a price: it cost the lives of three million people, hundreds of thousands of women were raped, and millions became refugees during the nine-month war.

Unesco's recognition is a reminder that the atrocities committed by the Pakistan army and the memory of our martyrs can never be forgotten, especially at a time when some countries are going as far as to denigrate our glorious struggle. A case in point is the recent attempt to distort history through a misleading video footage released on a webpage maintained by the Pakistan High Commission in Dhaka.

Bangabandhu's 7th March speech has always been an instrument of inspiration for Bangladesh, and now, with the status of world documentary heritage, has transcended national boundaries. This historic speech goes beyond being the exclusive preserve, and should be treated as such.  We would also like to suggest to the government to guard against its misuse by opportunistic politicians for political aggrandisement. It may be worth considering a guidance code which would lay down the occasions that it can be played so that it is not made light of by overuse and misuse.
