Wife files case against 'razakar' in Meherpur
2017-11-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Kushtia
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/wife-files-case-against-razakar-meherpur-1488109

The widow of a Meherpur freedom fighter has filed a case against an alleged razakar over abduction and killing of her husband during the Liberation War.

After taking the case into cognisance, Judge Md Mohiduzzaman of Meherpur Chief Judicial Magistrate Court on Monday ordered the authorities concerned to send the case documents to the International Crimes Tribunal (ICT) in Dhaka for necessary action.

Fulzan Necha, wife of late freedom fighter Abdul Jabbar of Amjhupi village in Meherpur, filed the case against Asgor Ali, 66, of the same village.

After receiving the documents of such cases, the ICT registrar's office usually send those to the investigation agency of the tribunal.

The agency then carries out a preliminary investigation and if convinced, it conducts a formal investigation. If it finds credible evidence of such crime, it recommends pressing charges against the accused for trial.

According to the case documents, Jabbar was an organiser of the Liberation War in 1971 in his area.

As the war began, he went to India, leaving her wife and daughters in Bangladesh. He was enlisted as a freedom fighter at Karimpur camp in West Bengal.

One day in mid-June, Jabbar came home to see his newborn baby. He started living at home secretly.

A group of 15 to 20 local razakars, led by Asgor, raided Jabbar's house; caught him, and set the home afire before taking him away.

The collaborators confined Jabbar to Nazrul School, one of their torture camps in Meherpur. After torturing him for a week, they killed Jabbar and buried him at Meherpur Government College ground, reads the case statement.

Fulzan quoted a book named “Meherpur Zillar Muktijuddher Itihas”, authored by Rafiqur Rashid, which described the abduction and killing of her husband.

The accused could not be reached for comment as he left the area following the filing of the case.
