4 charges framed against 3 Habiganj 'Razakars'
2015-09-30T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/4-charges-framed-against-3-habiganj-razakars-149434

The International Crimes Tribunal-1 yesterday framed four specific charges against three "Razakars" from Habiganj for their alleged involvement in crimes against humanity committed in the district during the 1971 Liberation War.

The three were charged with killing two freedom fighters, raping two women, confining and torturing an unarmed civilian, and arson and looting of the house of Maj Gen (retd) MA Rob, the Liberation War's deputy commander-in-chief.

Muhibur Rahman alias Boromian, 65, his younger brother Mujibur Rahman alias Angur Mian, 60, and their cousin Abdur Razzak, 63, however, plead not guilty.

Muhibur is the former chairman of Khagaura union council of Baniachang upazila in Habiganj and Mujibur the incumbent.

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque with members Justice Md Shahinur Islam and Justice Md Shohrowardi fixed October 21 for starting trial with recording of the prosecution's opening statement and testimony  of a prosecution witness.

The tribunal also asked the prosecution to supply to the defence before the date all the documents they intend to rely upon.  It directed the defence counsels to submit their documents and a list of defence witnesses, if any, on or before the date.

The prosecution on May 16 pressed the charges against Muhibur and Mujibur. Later, Razzak was implicated as the investigation officer found his involvement.

According to the prosecution, Muhibur, son  of  Daras  Uddin of Kumurshana under Baniachang, was a  "strong  follower " of  Syed  Kamrul  Ahsan, a  local  leader of Nejam-e-Islami, an anti-liberation political party.

Muhibur and Mujibur sided against  the Liberation  War  and  joined  the  local  Razakar Bahini, said the prosecution.

Muhibur's elder brother Kalamdhar, who passed away, was the chairman of Khagaura Peace Committee, another anti-liberation organisation, while another deceased younger brother Mostafa was the commander of Khagaura Razakar camp, according to the prosecution.

Razzak, son of Toij Ullah, was also a member of Razakar Bahini, an auxiliary force of the Pakistani occupation army, the prosecution said.

The tribunal, in its indictment order, said the formal charges, the statement of witnesses and other  materials  "prima  facie demonstrate  that  the  accused  persons enthusiastically  sided  with  the  locally  stationed  Pakistani  army  and  culpably collaborated  with  them  by  their  act  and  conduct  in  carrying  out  horrific activities..."

"At this stage, it is not permissible to arrive at any definite finding on it and as such the matter should be left for due adjudication only in trial," the tribunal said.
