1971 veteran forces’ members will get allowance: PM
2017-11-21T14:39:37+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/politics/bangladesh-1971-liberation-war-veteran-forces-members-will-get-allowance-prime-minister-sheikh-hasina-1494457

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today announced that the government would provide allowance from January next to the members of different forces who took part in the Liberation War.

“We’ve taken a decision to give allowance from January 2018 to those who fought for the country’s independence from different forces including the armed forces, Police, Ansar-VDP and Border Guard Bangladesh (formerly known as East Pakistan Rifles),” she told a reception on the occasion of the Armed Forces Day 2017 .

The prime minister accorded the reception to gallantry award-recipients freedom fighters and their heirs at the Army Multipurpose Hall at Dhaka Cantonment this morning.

Sheikh Hasina said those forces members who joined the Liberation War were not given allowance as they were in-service at that time. “All of them went on retirement and their families are now in much miseries... we will start providing allowance to them from January next Insha Allah,” she said.

In this connection, the premier mentioned that the demand is raised every year when she meets everybody on the Armed Forces Day. "So we have decided to give it," she said.

Pointing out that her government did whatever necessary for the valiant freedom fighters, the prime minister said: "Within our limited capacity, we're trying to give dignity to those who took part in the Liberation War and embraced martyrdom."

Principal Staff Officer of the Armed Forces Division (AFD) Lt Gen Md Mahfuzur Rahman delivered the welcome address at the function.

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque, PM's Security Advisor Major General (retd) Tarique Ahmed Siddiq, Chief of Army Staff General Abu Belal Muhammad Shafiul Haque, Chief of Naval Staff Admiral Nizamuddin Ahmad and Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Abu Esrar and high civil and military officials were present.

At the reception, Sheikh Hasina presented honorarium cheques and gifts including mobile phones and tabs to the successors of seven Bir Shreshthas as well as other gallantry award-recipients.

The prime minister also handed over "Shantikalin Padak" (peacetime medals) to 12 armed forces members and "Osamanya Seba Padak" (outstanding service medals) among 14 armed forces officers in recognition to their heroic role in war and peacetime
