President, PM pay homage to Armed Forces martyrs
2017-11-21T11:11:47+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/president-pm-sheikh-hasina-pay-homage-armed-forces-day-2017-martyrs-1971-liberation-war-shikha-anirban-flame-eternal-1494415

President M Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today paid rich tributes to the martyred members of Bangladesh Armed Forces on the occasion of the Armed Forces Day 2017. Both the president and the PM paid the homage by placing wreaths at the Shikha Anirban (flame eternal) in Dhaka Cantonment this morning. The president, who is also the Supreme Commander of Armed Forces, placed wreath at the altar at 8:00am and stood there in solemn silence for a while as a mark of respect to memories of the martyrs of 1971 Liberation War .

Later, a smartly turned out contingent of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force presented a salute on the occasion. President Hamid also signed the visitors' book there. Earlier, on his arrival at Shikha Anirban, chiefs of the three services and the principal staff officer of the Armed Forces Division received the President. After laying the wreath, the prime minister stood in solemn silence for sometime as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the martyrs, who made supreme sacrifices during the War of Liberation. A smartly-turned out contingent drawn from Army, Navy and Air Force presented a guard of honour at that time, while bugle played the last post. Later, Sheikh Hasina, also in-charge of the Ministry of Defence, signed the visitors' book kept on the premises of Shikha Anirban. Earlier, on her arrival at Shikha Anirban, the premier was received by Chief of Army Staff General Abu Belal Muhammad Shafiul Haque, Chief of Naval Staff Admiral M Nizamuddin Ahmad, Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Abu Esrar and Principal Staff Officer (PSO) of the Armed Forces Division (AFD) Lt Gen Md Mahfuzur Rahman. After the wreath-placing ceremony, the prime minister went to the Armed Forces Division (AFD) where chiefs of the three services made a courtesy call on her. On her arrival at the AFD, the prime minister was received by the PSO and director generals of the AFD. On this day during the War of Liberation in 1971, the Bangladesh Armed Forces comprising Army, Navy and Air Force, came into being and launched an all-out attack on the Pakistani occupation forces which sped up the victory in the Liberation War. After the independence of the country, this historic day is observed as the Armed Forces Day every year.
