Stay alert against anti-liberation forces: PM
2017-11-25T12:58:27+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/nation-celebrates-unesco-bangabandhu-7th-march-historic-speech-recognition-celebration-1496314

“We will have to remain alert so that anti-liberation forces like Razakar, Al Badr, war criminals, killers and the people who misinterpret the country’s history can never come to power,” Hasina said.

Hasina, also the Awami League chief, was addressing a rally at Suhrawardy Udyan as part of nationwide celebrations of Unesco’s recognition of the historic 7th March speech of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as a world documentary heritage.

“The country is going ahead and it will continue. We will build the country with the spirit of the Liberation War,” the premier said.

Hasina also said that she always fondly remembers the day of March 7, 1971 when Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman delivered the historic speech.

“Standing here, I remember the historic day in 1971. I had the fortune of being here (Suhrawardy Udyan which was previously known as Race Course Maidan) on that day,” Sheikh Hasina said.

The government employees along with people of all classes and professions, including school and college students were seen joining the rally in processions.

Around noon, a grand procession, led by Awami League General Secretary Obaidul Quader, was brought out from Bangabandhu's residence at Dhanmondi Road-32 in Dhaka, according to UNB.

The procession marched from the residence towards Suhrawardy Udyan where Bangabandhu delivered the landmark speech in a huge gathering on March 7, 1971.

Vehicular movement at Shahbagh, Press Club, Matsya Bhaban was completely halted owing to the rally heading towards Suhrawardy Udyan.

The celebration programmes have been organised to inform people, particularly the students and future generations, about the national and international significance of Bangabandhu's March 7 speech.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco) on October 30 recognised Bangabandhu's historic March 7 speech as part of world's documentary heritage.
