March 25 as Int'l Genocide Day: Take formal steps to get recognition
2017-11-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/march-25-intl-genocide-day-take-formal-steps-win-recognition-1496527

Academics and researchers campaigning for the United Nations recognition of March 25 as International Genocide Day yesterday urged the government to launch a formal initiative to that end.

The said denial and impunity over the atrocity would make room for more such crimes.

They campaigners were addressing an international seminar titled "1971: Genocide-Torture and Liberation War” organised by the Centre for Genocide-Torture and Liberation War Studies and Bangladesh Itihash Sammilani in the capital's Bangla Academy.

Inaugurated yesterday, the two-day event would feature five scholarly sessions on relevance and meaning of genocide conducted by experts from the USA, UK, India, Egypt, Cambodia and Bangladesh.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, at the UN General Assembly this year, reiterated her call on the international community to recognise atrocities committed by the occupying Pakistani army in 1971 as genocide and March 25 as “International Genocide Day”.

The parliament on March 11 this year unanimously adopted a resolution to observe March 25 as Genocide Day.

In his keynote speech at yesterday's seminar, war crimes researcher Shahriar Kabir said the people of the country had paid a lot for freedom. But the perpetrators never even admitted to their crimes.

“We have to fight for it and the government should take an official initiative for UN recognition of the day,” said Shahriar, also the president of Ekattorer Ghatak Dalal Nirmul Committee.

Referring to the persecution of Rohingyas in Myanmar, he said the atrocities are similar to the ones faced by Bangalees in 1971. Bangladesh is also being affected by the events.

Educationist Borhanuddin Khan Jahangir said Bangladesh achieved freedom after going through genocide.

“Trial of the genocide perpetrators is a prerequisite... And the nation will never step back from that demand,” he said.

Prime minister's International Affairs Adviser Gowher Rizvi, who attended the event as guest of honour, said studying of genocide was necessary to combat the propaganda aiming to demean the country's Liberation War.

It is also important to educate the future generations about history, he added.

Lauding the organisers, Commerce Minister Tofail Ahmed shared his memory of freedom fighters slaughtered and chopped into pieces for uttering the historic six-point demands.

Thomas A Dine, who received “Friends of Liberation War Honour” from Bangladesh government, said Pakistan army launched a systematic and pre-planned attack on unarmed Bangalees.

The evidence of genocide was apparent from the very beginning, said the American social worker.

Hiranmay Karlekar, another recipient of the honour, said the memory of Pakistan army's brutality has burdened him since 1971.

Prof Muntassir Mamoon, Bir Protik Lt Col (Retd) Quazi Sajjad Ali Zahir, and Brig (Retd) RP Singh of Indian army, among others, spoke at the event.
