Priyo MuktiPin: a new digital archive of Liberation War
2017-12-11T00:00:00+06:00 | PRESS RELEASE
https://www.thedailystar.net/bytes/priyo-muktipin-new-digital-archive-liberation-war-1503304

Priyo Limited has taken steps to build a digital archive of liberation war. They plan to archive every minute's incident, all in a single map called 'MUKTIPIN'. Priyo has unveiled this 'Priyo Pins' map with a unique feature- "Mukti Pin" in the month of December 2017. People can create pins on the map of Bangladesh to describe the liberation war in any specific location with the help of this feature. The system will allow entering only the events on any spots during the liberation war of Bangladesh in 1971.

The project will initially run up to February 28, 2018. The top 100 participants ranked on accurate pin placing will get Tk. 10,000/- reward each along with certificates and other gifts. Research institutes have already been registered for the operation. Besides, roadshows, public awareness program, media advertising and other necessary steps have also been planned and implemented. Participants have to put a pin on a specific place of the digital map based on different war incident categories in the following webpage priyo.com/muktipin.

Mobile apps have also been introduced for easy participation.

One of the most responsible jobs of archiving the history is its accuracy. The documents that would be used must have to be verified to make it acceptable. For this purpose, Priyo limited has appointed an advisory panel who wished to support this archiving process. Widely respected figures like Professor Dr Anisuzzaman, Professor Dr Mohammad Kaykobad,  Professor Dr Muhammed Zafar Iqbal, Dr Gowher Rizvi are the member of the advisory panel.

MUKTIPIN is already open to the participants and anyone can pin right now through available digital devices. People are engaging more and more and the numbers of pins have already crossed its first 4 digits. Participation from every corner of the country could make this huge task possible and through this platform, Bangladesh is going to get her first most organized, device friendly, interactive, largest and most importantly, verified collections of the liberation war documents in an everlasting digital format. We expect that every patriotic citizen from this holy soil of Bangladesh would do their best to accomplish this big task
