Remembered, rarely
2017-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Ahmed Humayun Kabir Topu
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/remembered-rarely-1504786

When the nation is observing Martyred Intellectuals Day today with due respect and solemnity, there is hardly any programme commemorating martyred intellectual Dr Fazle Rabbi at his home district of Pabna.

Even the new generation knows little about his glorious contribution. Only the family members are keeping his memory alive through various social activities and charitable programmes.

Over the years, no government initiatives have been taken in this regard, said Dr Rabbi's nephew Fazle Shaharan Bipu, member secretary of Dr Fazle Rabbi Foundation.

Moreover, locals continue to demand naming Pabna Medical College Hospital (PMCH) after the famous son of soil.

Fazle Shahid, Dr Rabbi's brother, said, “My brother sacrificed his life for the country's independence but there is hardly any programme commemorating him.”

Born on September 21 in 1932 at Chhatiani village in Pabna Sadar upazila, Dr Rabbi passed the SSC in 1948 from Pabna Zila School and the HSC from Dhaka College in 1950 with brilliant results.

He completed MBBS in 1955 from Dhaka Medical College under Dhaka University and received a gold medal for his outstanding results. Later, he joined Dhaka Medical College as registrar.

In 1960, Dr Rabbi went to England for higher studies and achieved an MRCP in cardiology and another MRCP in medicine from there in 1962. He served Hammersmith Hospital and then Middlesex Hospital in England. Despite a chequered career there, Dr Rabbi came back to his motherland and joined Dhaka Medical College as an associate professor in 1963.

An advocate of equitable rights of the Bangalees during the Pakistan period, Dr Rabbi extended all sorts of cooperation to the freedom fighters and victims of torture by the Pakistan army and their aides during the Liberation War. On December 15, 1971, the Pakistani occupation army and its auxiliary force Al-Badr picked up Dr Rabbi from his Siddheswari residence in the capital and killed him on that night. His body was recovered from Rayerbazar mass grave on December 18.
