Glorifying the indomitable spirit of the Liberation War
2017-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Zahangir Alom
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/exhibition/glorifying-the-indomitable-spirit-the-liberation-war-1504489

Internationally-famous Bangladeshi artist Shahabuddin Ahmed's latest solo painting exhibition is now on at Galerie Daniel Besseiche in Paris, France. This is one of the world famous and prestigious galleries at the heart of Paris where master painters Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse and Marc Chagall held their solo exhibitions. The conscience and the indomitable spirit of the Liberation War have frequently appeared as prominent connotations on Shahabuddin's canvas. This exhibition is no exception of that. The Paris-based artist has been displaying 27 of his recent artworks in the show that was opened on July 31 and will continue until January 2018.

“Liberation War is my favourite subject on which I have been portraying paintings for years. My own style is also noticeable in the displayed works. Besides, I am showcasing portraits of famous political personalities like Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman and Mahatma Gandhi,” said Shahabuddin Ahmed.

“This is a bold display of artworks by celebrated artist Shahabuddin Ahmed at the three floors of the world class gallery. Portraits of famous personalities like Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Rabindranath Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi have displayed prominently at the show. I have witnessed many solo shows by the artist; but never watched such a fantastic show before. I marvelled at being in the gallery,” said famous photographer Nasir Ali Mamun, who recently visited Shahabuddin in Paris.

Shahabuddin's paintings delve into the contemporary life and times. He is an optimist and this is evidently expressed in his paintings. Bold strokes, vibrant colours and figurative expressions are the hallmark of his works. He has the capability to overcome the constraints of time and space. In their dynamism his paintings depict fearless human figures that cut through the difficulties of life. The vibrancy and force of his brushwork highlights this aspect and create a strong sense of movement. Above all his compositions are unmistakably musical and rhythmic. Shahabuddin's figures seem to be enthralled in the cosmic dance at times merging with the ethereal forces.

The artist hoisted the Bangladeshi flag in erstwhile East Pakistan Radio at 11:30am on December 16, when the Pakistan army was yet to surrender. But, he knew what was going to happen. “This was the indomitable spirit and I kept that up. I take pride in that. I fought a nine-month battle of freeing my motherland. This is the glorious part of my life,” said Shahabuddin Ahmed in a previous conversation with The Daily Star.

Shahabuddin's paintings are displayed in many prestigious galleries across the globe, including Museum Olympic Laussane, Switzerland and Bourn-En Brasse Museum, France. Declared as one of the fifty Master Painters of Contemporary Arts, he was bestowed with an award at the Olympiad of Arts, Barcelona in 1992 and also awarded the French title Chevalier De L'ordre Des Arts Et Des Lettres (Knight in the Order of Fine Arts and Humanities) by the Ministry for Cultural Affair and Communication of France in 2014. He also received Bangladesh's Shadhinata Padak in 2000 and Bangla Academy Award in 1974.
