5 Memorable Films Based on the Liberation War
2017-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Shams Rashid Tonmoy
https://www.thedailystar.net/showbiz/movie-review-0/5-memorable-films-based-the-liberation-war-1505542

Muktir Gaan (1995)

Directed by Tareque Masud and Catherine Masud, Muktir Gaan is a documentary film which portrayed the reality of the Liberation War with a rather unique approach. Based on the live footage taken by the American filmmaker Lear Levin, the film focuses on a group of actors and musicians named Bangladesh Mukti Shangrami Shilpi Shangstha, who encouraged the freedom fighters through inspirational songs and plays. The non-fictional storytelling adds a more engaging aspect to the gruesomeness of the War, and shows the War through the perspective of this travelling group and how they experience the dark times of this country. Muktir Gaan is well known for using music to emphasis on how Bangladesh expressed its cultural identity during those trying times.

Ora Egaro Jon (1972)

Ora Egaro Jon made a remarkable contribution by being the first film regarding the Liberation War after Bangladesh had gained its independence. Released in 1972, the film depicts the darkness of its previous years and how Bangladeshis, through their unbending will and unbeatable tenacity, defeated the Pakistani army to win independence. Directed by Chashi Nazul Islam and written by Al Masood, the film portrayed a young and passionate freedom fighter struggling to overcome the vehement opposition. The lead role was played by Kamrul Alam Khan Khasru, who was a freedom fighter and a notable member of the Liberation Army in real life. Ora Egaro Jon also featured Abdur Razzak, Shabana, Syed Hasan Imam and A.T.M. Shamsuzzaman.

Amar Bondhu Rashed (2011)

Amar Bondhu Rashed provides a different outlook to the cruelty of the Liberation War by focusing on the youth rather than the adults during those times. Directed by Morshedul Islam, this film was based on the novel of the same name by Muhammad Zafar Iqbal. Amar Bondhu Rashed portrays the story of the titular character Rashed narrated by his classmate Ibu, both of whom get involved with the Muktibahini and attempt to save a friend of their from imminent death. This was a unique film about the Liberation War, in the sense that it shows how the younger Bangladeshis coped with the War and how some of them even took part in it, unfortunately being martyred in the process.

Megher Onek Rong (1976)

Films regarding the Liberation War of Bangladesh tend to revolve around dark themes quite often. However, Megher Onek Rong takes the cake by focusing on perhaps the most gruesome aspect of the War: rape of Bangladeshi women. The film shows how soldiers of the Pakistani army tortured and killed innocent Bangladeshis as well as the violation of women at the hands of these oppressors. Megher Onek Rong also shows how the victimized women committed suicide and how their children were adopted by strangers without any care.  This film is notable for winning five National Film Awards, including Best Music Director Award by Ferdausi Rahman and the Best Director Award by Harunur Rashid.

Guerrilla (2011)

The story of Guerrilla begins from the dreadful Operation Searchlight of 25th March, 1971. Played by Jaya Ahsan, the lead character Bilkis Banu finds herself involved in a guerrilla operation while in the search for her missing husband Hasan Ahmed, played by Ferdous Ahmed. The film shows the slaughter of Bangladeshis through the eyes of an innocent woman, and depicts a very stern outlook on the cold-heartedness of the Pakistani military. Adapted from the novel Nishiddho Loban by Syed Shamsul Huq, Guerrilla, directed by Nasiruddin Yousuff, broke records during its release year by winning awards in a total of 10 categories in the 2011 National Film Awards.
