Nation pays tributes to Liberation War martyrs
2017-12-16T11:05:40+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/bangladesh-nation-pays-tributes-liberation-war-martyrs-on-victory-day-2017-1505785

The nation is celebrating the 47th Victory Day today, paying homage to three million martyrs and freedom fighters of the Liberation War.

On this day in 1971, Pakistani occupation forces surrendered after a nine-month war resulting in independent and sovereign Bangladesh.

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid rich tributes to the martyrs of the Liberation War by placing wreaths at the National Mausoleum at Savar at 6:34am and stood there in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the martyrs of 1971, according to UNB.

A smartly turned out contingent drawn from Bangladesh Army, Bangladesh Navy and Bangladesh Air Force presented a state salute on the occasion when bugles played the last post.

The leader of the opposition in parliament, ministers, state ministers, chiefs of the three services, MPs, freedom fighters, diplomats, representatives of different development partners and high civil and military officials were, among others, present.

Later, flanked by senior party leaders, Sheikh Hasina, also Awami League President, laid another wreath at the National Mausoleum as the party chief.

The day is a public holiday.

This year, the Victory Day celebration has reached a new height as the Unesco on October 30 recognised Bangabandhu's historic March 7 speech as a world documentary heritage.

Different political parties, socio-cultural organisations and educational institutions have taken up various programmes to mark the day.

As part of the day's programmes, a colourful parade was held at the National Parade Square at Sher-e-Bangla Nagar where freedom fighters, members of the armed forces and law enforcement agencies were present.

The national flag is hoisted atop all government and private buildings while the government and semi-government buildings and other public places will be illuminated and roads and islands will be decorated with flags and festoons in all cities of the country on the occasion.
