Liberation War on celluloid
2017-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Shah Alam Shazu
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/liberation-war-celluloid-1505185

In four decades of independence, the Bangladeshi film industry has taken giant strides. Although the number of annual movie titles has experienced a decline in recent years, the industry previously enjoyed a boom -- when the cinema halls used to be packed to the brim. However, only a handful of movies have been made so far on the Liberation War, all of which have gained much acclaim from both critics and the audience.

“Ora Egaro Jon” is the first of its kind when it comes to films on the war. Directed by Chashi Nazrul Islam, the film portrays the experiences of some movie-loving youths during the Liberation War. The roles in the film were played by real Freedom Fighters. Although many years have passed since it first hit the silver screen, Ora Egaro Jon still holds a certain appeal for the film buffs.

“Jibon Theke Neya” is another timeless classic, directed by Zahir Raihan. Inspired by events surrounding the mass uprising of 1969, the movie was released prior to the war, but still falls under the category of movies that represent the true spirit of independence. In the movie filled with ironies, Raihan used the metaphor of a family to unmask the hypocrisies and oppression of those clinging to power. The movie, featuring the stellar cast of Rowshan Jamil, Anwar Hossain, Khan Ataur Rahman, Razzak, Rosy Afsari and Suchonda, continues to be an audience favourite.

Director and actor Subhash Dutta received great accolades for making the film “Orunodoyer Ognishakkhi”. Bobita gained a large share of the limelight for her performance in the movie.

Another milestone in the genre is Narayan Ghosh Mita's “Alor Michhil”. The plot revolves around a group of unscrupulous people who are submerged in corruption. “Alor Michhil” shows how some youths -- returning from the war -- foil the selfish and unethical attempts by those culprits.

Khan Ataur Rahman also directed a memorable film, titled “Abar Tora Manush Haw”, on this theme. The frail economy of the post-war country was pushing youths into depression. Khan Ataur Rahman made the film to bring back those youths to the right path.

Chashi Nazrul Islam's “Songram” (1974) is based on the diary of sector commander Khaled Mosharraf. The movie was a commercial success.

Another hit was Shahidul Islam Khokon's “Commander”, released in 1994. In the same year, Kazi Hayat also made a film on the Liberation War, titled “Sipahi”. The movie focused on the struggles faced by the youth, when the country was still reeling from the gruesome effects of the war.

Humayun Ahmed made his directorial debut in 1994 with “Aguner Poroshmoni”, an instant classic. The story circled around a family forced to stay indoors during the war. Several actors won national film awards for their performance in the movie.

Later in 2004, Humayun Ahmed also made “Shyamol Chhaya”, focusing on a group's journey by a boat during the tumultuous period of the war.

Tanvir Mokammel's “Ekattor” deserves mention as a very well made documentary on the Liberation War.

Tauquir Ahmed's war film “Joyjatra” was praised both in the country and in the international arena. The new generation was introduced to different aspects of the war through the film. Several popular TV stars acted in the film.

Tareque Masud's “Muktir Gaan” remains one of the most successful documentations of the war.

In the post-2010s, the most notable films based on the Liberation War remains Nasiruddin Yousuff-directed “Guerrilla” (2011). Based on Syed Shamsul Haq's novel “Nishiddho Loban” and starring Jaya Ahsan, Ferdous, ATM Shamsuzzaman, Raisul Islam Asad and a host of other seasoned actors, the film was the recipient of a staggering 10 National Film Awards, as well as the NETPAC Award at the Kolkata International Film Festival. Other notable films of the era are Tanvir Mokammel's “Jibondhuli”, Morshedul Islam's adaptation of Dr. Muhammad Zafar Iqbal's children's novel “Amar Bondhu Rashed” (2011) and Humayun Ahmed 2014 adaptation “Anil Bagchi'r Ekdin” (which won six National Film Awards), Zahidur Rahim Anjan's 2014 film “Meghmallar” (based on Akhtaruzzaman Elius' short story “The Raincoat”), and Fakhrul Arefeen Khan's “Bhuban Majhi” (2016) starring Aparna Ghosh and Parambrata Chatterjee.

Some other key movies on the Liberation War include “Roktakto Bangla”, “Bagha Bangali”, “Ekattorer Jishu”, “Dhire Bohe Meghna”, “Muktir Kotha”, “Hangor Nodi Grenade”, “Agami”, “Nodir Naam Modhumoti”, “Megher Onek Rong”, “Bangla Ma-er Damal Chhele”, “Shobhon-er Ekattor”.
