Chhayanaut to hold Victory Day programmes at DU
2017-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/chhayanaut-hold-victory-day-programmes-du-1505458

Chhayanaut, one of the longest-standing cultural lighthouses of the country, is joining hands with Dhaka University (DU) for the third year running, to celebrate the glorious occasion of our Victory Day today. The programme will be held at the central playground of the Dhaka University, at 3:45pm.

The programme, to be held at the DU central playground, will be inaugurated by DU VC Professor Md. Akhtaruzzaman, Deepto TV's Managing Director Kazi Zahedul Hasan and Chhayanaut Chair Sanjida Khatun. Deepto TV will broadcast the programme live. The disclosures were made at a press conference yesterday at Chhayanaut.

This year's programme will feature nine chorus songs with dance performances, one solo song, one solo recitation and a duet song. Sharmila Banerjee, Belayet Hossain, Sonia Rashid, Farhana Ahmed and Shraboni Mazumdar have directed the dance pieces, with music director from Suman Majumdar and Bijon Chandra Mistry. Syed Hasan Imam will recite Rudra Muhammad Shahidullah's “Batashe Lash'er Gondho”; Laisa Ahmed Lisa will present the solo song while the duet will be sung by Farhana Akhter Sharli and Bijon Chandra Mistry. The songs have been chosen from the catalogues of Rabindranath Tagore, Kazi Nazrul Islam and Dwijendralal Roy, along with compositions of Abdul Latif, Girin Chakrabarty, Joydeb Sen, Mohini Chowdhury and Shah Abdul Karim.

Students and members of Bangladesh Scouts Dhaka Metropolitan, Ati Bhawal Higher Secondary School, Holy Cross School and College, Uddipon and Nalanda Schools, Academia, Excel Academy, European Standard School, South Breeze, Sunbeams and Scholastica will join some three thousand members of Chhayanaut in the songs.

Like the last two years, the programme is open to all. General audience can enter the field through the swimming pool gate next to the Doyel Chattar.

The programme will come to an end at 4:31pm through singing the National Anthem, marking the moment the Pakistan Army surrendered on December 16, 1971 to signify the victory of this country's men and the birth of Bangladesh.
