A Liberation War thriller in the offing
2018-01-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Shah Alam Shazu
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/film/liberation-war-thriller-the-offing-1521256

After the roaring success of “Dhaka Attack” last year, director Dipankar Dipon has set his sights on a new project, and it's a biggie. At a press conference held yesterday at Biswa Sahitya Kendra, the new film's title was announced by Minister of Information Hasanul Haq Inu: “Do or Die”.

Set against the backdrop of the Liberation War, the action thriller will outline the events faced by Flight Lieutenant Shamsul Alam Bir Uttam during Operation Kilo Flight, who commandeered a small aircraft in the incredible mission. This also makes “Do or Die” to be the first film in Bangladesh to depict an aerial warfare mission.

In attendance at the press conference were three members of the historic Operation Kilo Flight: Shadhinata Padak honouree Group Captain Shamsul Alam Bir Uttam, Captain Shahabuddin Ahmed Bir Uttam and Captain Akram Ahmed Bir Uttam.

Other valorous Freedom Fighters - Captain Abdul Khalek Bir Pratik, Nurul Alam Bir Pratik and Corporal Mohammad Rustom Bir Pratik were also present at the event.

“I truly appreciate that Dipankar Dipon is undertaking this mammoth responsibility,” stated Hasanul Haq Inu. “The Liberation War is our pride, and I wish the film production crew the best of luck.”

Khaledur Rahman Jewel and Mohammad Ali Haider spoke at the event on behalf of producers Three Wheelers Limited, Sohel Khan Dipon (from Main Square Corporation) and Sunny Anwar (screenwriter of “Dhaka Attack”) also expressed their felicitations for the project.

“There can be no better story of bravery than the ones lived by the Freedom Fighters. With this film, I hope to instill courage within the hearts of the current generation, and a sense of pride and love for their land,” director Dipankar Dipon said.

The film is currently in its screenplay phase, which will be finalized after extensive research and fieldwork. While no casting decisions have been made yet, Dipon expressed hopes of getting Bangladeshi and Indian actors for the film. “Do or Die” is expected to go on floors in November this year in Bangladesh and India, and producers are eyeing a 2019 release date.

Kilo Flight was the code name for the first unit of the Bangladesh Air Force, which was formed by defecting Bangladeshi military officers of the Pakistan Army. As part of Operation Kilo Flight, Shamsul Alam, Shahbuddin Ahmed and Akram Ahmed flew a modified DHC-3 Otter amphibious aircraft on December 3, 1971 to Chittagong's Patenga in order to destroy the Eastern Oil Refinery, a major fuel reserve for the Pakistani Army.
