3 Noakhali 'Razakars' held
2015-10-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/3-noakhali-razakars-held-152536

Police yesterday arrested three war crimes accused of Noakhali hours after International Crimes Tribunal-1 issued an arrest warrant against five "Razakars" for their alleged involvement in crimes in Sudharam upazila during the 1971 Liberation War.

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque with members Justice Md Shahinur Islam and Justice Md Shohrowardi issued the warrant hearing a petition of the prosecution requesting it so as to prevent them from fleeing.

Prosecutor Zahid Imam also pressed three charges against them over the killing of at least 111 people in three incidents.

Police arrested Amir Ahmad alias Razakar Amir Ali, 70, in his Uttar Fakirpur house around 2:00pm; and Md Joynal Abedin, 73, in his Syedpur (Natun Dewanbari) home around 5:30pm, Shudharam Model Police Station Officer-in-Charge (OC) (Investigation) Mirza Mohammad Hasan told The Daily Star.

Mohammad Yusuf, 60, of Ramharitaluk village, was arrested in his current address, Haziganj in Ramgati upazila of Laxmipur around 5:30pm, said Ramgati Police Station OC Iqbal Hossain.

The other accused are Abul Kalam alias AKM Mansur, 67, of Nandanpur; and Md Abdul Kuddus, 84, of Laxminarayanpur of the upazila. However, Abul currently lives in Savar and Kuddus in the capital's Lalbagh, says the prosecution.

Zahid said the investigation office completed the probe on August 31.

The prosecution usually seeks arrests during investigations. But this is the first time it was sought after submission of the formal charge, investigation report, witnesses' statements and other documents.

The first charge says the five were involved in the killing of at least 100 people of Sreepur and Sonapur villages on June 15.

Amir, Abul and Joynal were involved in the abduction and killing of two people of Pashim Karimpur and Debipur village on September 13, reads the second.

The third says Amir, Abul and Yusuf were involved in the abduction, torture and killing of at least nine people of Ramharitaluk, Debipur and Uttar Chakla villages the same day.
