Imbued with spirit of Liberation War
2018-02-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Mathews Chiran
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/imbued-spirit-liberation-war-1533238

Like previous years, this year's book fair remains an opportunity for youth to learn, admire and get inspired by the heroism and sacrifices of the countless who fought for protecting the country's independence and sovereignty.

Even the fair venue, Suhrawardy Udyan, is etched in history. It is the place where Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman made the historic March 7 speech in 1971 and called on the freedom-loving Bangalees to wage a decisive struggle against the Pakistani rulers.

Not just books, this year's Amar Ekushey Granthamela is offering an array of Liberation War memorabilia for the visitors.

With posters depicting heroism and sacrifices, the plight of people and various newspaper clippings on the war pasted on the walls, the Liberation War Museum stall at Bangla Academy is not only selling books, it is also inspiring the new generation.

Tahsin, a first-year student of Dhaka University, was gently folding two posters -- “September on Jessore Road” and “Concert for Bangladesh” -- she bought at the stall yesterday.

“I read the poem many a times. I bought the poster as it is an important piece of our history,” she said. “After visiting the stall, I feel immensely proud,” she added.

Not just her, many of the visitors were stepping inside the stall and immersing them in the glorious chapter of the country's history.

They were also buying DVDs of “Concert for Bangladesh” and Zahir Raihan's “Stop Genocide”.

“We had set up the stall mainly to inspire the young generation…,” said Haresuzzaman of the stall.

Right next to it, Bangladesh Post Office (BPO) has also set up a stall imbued with the spirit of the Liberation War. BPO has released a total of 71 commemorative postal stamps as a tribute. “The stamps are available at any post office. It is to honour the martyrs…,” said Deputy Postmaster General of BPO Shobnam Rikta. “Although writing letter is now almost obsolete, the stamps are still attracting people of different ages,” she said.

Almost all the publishers brought out books on the Liberation War. Readers were seen thronging the fair to relive and honour the country's glorious history.

“The more I read about the Liberation War, the more I feel proud of my country…,” said Arpita Farzana. The MBA student bought “Sei Sob Pakistani” by Muntassir Mamoon.

“Boi mela provides a perfect opportunity for the readers to get books on the Liberation War as most of the publishers bring out such books here,” she added.

People of all ages were seen buying novels, research-based books, biographies and memorabilia on the Liberation War at the fair yesterday. “Muktijuddho O Juddhaporadh” edited by Arif Rahman, “Ekattorer Ghatokder Bichare Muslim Identity er Opobeboher” by Nijhum Majumder, “Kotha Sahitya Muktijuddho O Onyanyo” by Chowdhury Shajahan and “Muktijuddher Golpo” by Selina Hossain among many others drew readers' attention.

At total of 102 books arrived yesterday.
