Ekushey Laureates share feelings on TDS' anniversary
2018-02-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Robina Rashid Bhuiyan
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/event/ekushey-laureates-share-feelings-tds-anniversary-1535578

Founded 27 years ago with a pledge to commit to journalism without fear or favour, The Daily Star is celebrating its anniversary with festivities and fervor today. Among recent events is the significant selection of winning nominees for the Ekushey Padak, some of whom have taken turns to elaborate their thoughts on The Daily Star's journey and their own. Excerpts:

Robiul Hossain, architect and poet

“I have received the award at an advanced age, and it feels like fathering children quite late in life. At this stage in my life I believe in natural flow of events, and the dreams and passions I once harboured during my youth have diminished a little. But I believe in my work, and I am happy to be here. It is also a happy event to witness The Daily Star has reaching 27 years. It's the top paper among English language newspapers, and they have always diligently worked towards bringing our attention to our traditions, heritage, the Liberation War and more. It is also quite significant that the anniversary is taking place during the month of spring, love, and our Mother Language day. This has been a blessed month indeed, and I would like to see them grow in the years to come.”

Sujeya Syam, composer

“This has been a happy year for me, especially since I've been honoured with the Ekushey Padak. The music industry in Bangladesh needs more uplifting, and this requires me to remain dedicated to my work, as I feel that my responsibility has only grown. I would like to thank The Daily Star for their contributions in giving coverage to Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra artistes and having done a commendable job in promoting our culture. Without their efforts, very few people would understand our work.”

Minu Haque, dancer

“The Daily Star has grown to be the spirit of this generation. Everyone in my family reads the paper, and all our news, good or bad, comes from there. The work they have done there over the years is simply fantastic, and I am very happy at what they have achieved. I would love to keep reading the paper in the years to come.”

Khurshid Alam, singer

“There is a lot to learn from The Daily Star, and the team working there are intelligent and smart, which to me guarantees quality content. I feel everyone should read The Daily Star to learn new things, and I would like to extend my support and gratitude towards the paper and its team. If there is any change I would like to see in the coming years, I would like more content geared towards children, especially middle school children.”
