Language Movement hero desires to see PM
2018-02-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Kongkon Karmaker
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/language-movement-hero-desires-see-pm-1537735

Language Movement veteran Sumanta Kumar Basak, who has been suffering from various old age complications, has expressed his desire to see Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina with his own eyes.

“Without contribution from the family of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Bangladesh would not exist in the global map,” said the 96-year-old Language Movement hero, who lives at Roykali village in Joypurhat's Akkelpur upazila.

“It has been 66 years since the Language Movement in 1952 and I never desired anything in my life before,” Sumanta said.

“My first and last desire is to see Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina with my own eyes,” said the veteran in a shaky voice.

Due to different complications, the language hero spends most of his time sitting on a wooden wheelchair as he is too weak to walk.

His family members said alongside reading daily newspapers and listening to songs on Language Movement are still his inspiration for living.

After passing his matriculation examination, Sumanta, born at Roykali village on January 25, 1922, took admission at Government Azizul Haque College in Bogra.

Recalling the thrilling days of his college time, he said, “We actively participated in different meetings and hartal in Bogra, demanding Bangla as our state language.”

Advocate Gaziul Haque was the organiser of those movements, he recalled.

He could not even appear at his Intermediate final examination after the then East Pakistan government issued an arrest warrant against him, Sumanta said.

After successfully passing his Intermediate the following year, he started his teaching career at Roykali High School the same year.

Sumanta, a father of five children, alleged that the Language Movement heroes are much neglected. “No one inquires about us,” he added.

The language hero, who retired from teaching in 1991, urged the people of the county to respect the Shaheed Minar.

He also thanked the government for organising Ekushey Book Fair in the month of February.
