MARCH 4, 1971: The movement in full swing
2018-03-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/march-4-1971-the-movement-full-blast-1543144

The non-cooperation movement, launched by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the Awami League on March 2nd, was on full-throttle now.

Two days into the movement for autonomy for the then East Pakistan, this was the day, 47 years ago, when some important incidents would play a vital role in what was to come.

The vital decision to rename Radio Pakistan as Dhaka Betar was taken by the officers and employees of the radio's centre in Dhaka.

The station not only broadcasted all directives issued by the Awami League, but also played the patriotic tunes of Rabindranath Tagore and rebel poet Kazi Nazrul Islam.

The artistes of then East Pakistan had announced that as long as the people and students of the country continue to fight, they will not perform for Radio Pakistan.

Meanwhile, the people of Bangladesh were greeted and congratulated by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman for successfully observing the strike he had called as a consequence of the abrupt postponement of the national assembly session by General Yahya Khan that was to be held on March 3rd.

He, however, asked offices to remain open over the next couple of days so that employees could collect their salaries.

But he reminded everyone that the fight was still going on.

He said that no nation had ever achieved independence without immense sacrifice, urging everyone to stand up against the ploy to continue repression.

Bangabandhu then again called for hartals on March 5th and 6th, starting from 6:00am till 2:00pm.

That same day, in protest against military attack on Bangalees, Sahibzada Yaqub Khan, resigned from his posts as governor of East Pakistan and martial law administrator.

General Tikka Khan was to then take over as governer of East Pakistan.

In another development, Air Marshal (retd) Asghar Khan in Karachi demanded that power be immediately handed over to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in order to avert disaster in Pakistan.

The junta in Rawalpindi appeared to root about for an answer to the problem, but did not exactly know how to go about doing it.

As days passed, the crisis kept deepening further.
