The Battle of Kamalpur-31 July 1971
2007-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-15470

Not known to many is the fact that the Mukti Bahini had started engaging the occupation forces at the very early stages of the War of Liberation in conventional battles. One of the many such significant battles was the "Battle of Kamalpur" launched against the Pakistani forces by troops of Z Force, commanded by the then Major Ziaur Rahman, on 31 July 1971. On the eve of the Victory Day we publish a brief account of the battle, excerpted from the book "Bangladesh at War" by Maj Gen K M Safiullah BU, psc (Retd)

Kamalpur was a strong Pakistani border outpost situated on the mouth of the old Brahmaputra and on the road link with Mymensingh via Jamalpur. It contained concrete bunkers with shell-proof roofs. Communication trenches were dug in to provide communication between bunkers. The defence had in its perimeter booby traps and minefield. The Pakistani troops used to fall back on the inner line of defence in hours of darkness.

Captain Salahuddin Momtaz was in Quetta. He was a solider with a lion's heart full of patriotic zeal. It was rather impossible for him to remain a silent spectator when Bangladesh was bleeding. In a desperate attempt he was successful in escaping to his motherland during early July and reported to 'Z' Froce. Salahuddin Momtaz joined 1 East Bengal.

The battalion at that time was contemplating to launch a big offensive. In order, therefore, to undertake such an operation, information about the enemy was vital. Salahuddin Momtaz was one of those who were sent on reconnaissance missions to collect information about the enemy. He at times conducted some very daring reconnaissance missions at Kamalpur border outpost.

During one such mission he ran across an enemy patrol which indicated to the enemy our aggressive posture. Enemy strength at Kamalpur was immediately raised to two companies of 31 Baluch excluding Razakars.

The information was thus obtained and a plan was made.

The attack was to be launched from the north-east of the enemy post with two companies. Delta on the left and Bravo on the right, commanded respectively by Salahuddin Momtaz and Hafiz.

From the assembly area they moved. Delta Company leading followed by Bravo Company. Next in order was the battalion orders group (O group) where in addition to Moin, the battalion commander, Zia, was also present. At H-hour  own artillery was programmed to provide covering fire.

The attacking troops were absolutely raw. There was a bit of confusion at the forming up place resulting in delay in the move. It was all due to the officers' personal example and motivation that the troops started moving on to the objective.

As they moved towards the objective the enemy artillery also opened up. Our troops came under a very heavy fire and started sustaining casualties. Their movement became slow. Since the bulk of the troops did not have previous war experience they began to go to ground more frequently than the enemy shelling. Salahuddin played a heroic role at this stage in reviving the morale of his troops. They then moved on.

The outer perimeter was being vacated by the enemy. Our troops entered the outer perimeter and began to cross the minefield. The enemy was bringing in effective fire on us from the shell-proof bunkers of the inner defence.

The battle started gaining momentum. Casualties were piling up. But there was no going back, Salahuddin Momtaz, who had dynamic leadership quality, was leading the troops into the inner defence. Shouting at the top of his voice, he was directing his men and chanting words of encouragement to them. An embodiment of courage himself, fearless Salahuddin Momtaz snubbed one of his faithful soldiers saying, "Yahya Khan has not yet been able to manufacture the bullet that would kill me."

Those were not the last words. Two shells dropped in front of Salahuddin Momtaz. Twice he shook and then all was over.

Salahuddin Momtaz murmured, "If you have to die, die after killing the enemy. Die on the soil of Bangladesh." Salahuddin's body could not be retrieved. Three soldiers died in their attempt to retrieve the dead body of their beloved leader. However, his watch, sten gun and some papers were retrieved.

Hafiz miraculously escaped death. His sten gun blew off by an enemy artillery shell splinter. He got injured. Naik Rabiul ran in the face of enemy fire to evacuate Hafiz to safety. But he was mortally injured there.

Salahuddin Momtaz and died Hafiz was injured. These incidents left the two attacking companies in a state of chaos and confusion. The community centre situated behind the forming up place was getting filled with battle casualties. Ultimately at 7-30 am Moin ordered the battalion to withdraw.

Both enemy and own troops died in a great number in this action. The Pakistanis for the first time realised that Bengalees knew how to fight fearlessly. The Senior Tigers evoked fear in the mind of the enemy at Kamalpur. The concrete bunkers saved them from bullets and artillery shells but not from fear. This battle was most significant in the sense that it taught the first lesson of attack to the new recruits of the Bengal Regiments. Lessons learned at Kamalpur were never lost sight of by us. Subsequently, when the series of attacks continued, the spirit of Kamalpur came back every time.
