War trial: 3 Noakhali Razakars get death
2018-03-13T11:54:36+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/war-crimes-trial-in-bangladesh-3-noakhali-razakars-get-death-1547548

A war trial tribunal in Bangladesh today awarded death to three Noakhali men and one to 20 years of jail after conviction in crimes committed during 1971 Liberation War.

Accused Amir Ali, 70, Md Joynal Abedin, 73, and Abul Kalam alias AKM Mansur, 67, have been awarded death. Abdul Kuddus, 84, has been given 20 years in jail.

Among them, Abul Kalam alias AKM Mansur is currently absconding. The trial court has ordered the government authorities to take necessary steps to arrest them.

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Md Shahinur Islam delivered the verdict this morning. Closing arguments in the case ended back on February 6.

On June 20, 2016, the tribunal framed three charges against the four who were allegedly involved with Razakar Bahini, an auxiliary force of Pakistani occupation army, and the killing of at least 111 people in three incidents.

The prosecution on October 5, 2015, pressed charges against five men from Noakhali, including the four. But Mohammad Yusuf later died of old age complications and was not indicted, said prosecutor Zahid Imam.

According to the first charge, the four were involved in the killing of at least 100 people of Sreepur and Sonapur villages on June 15.

Amir, Abul and Joynal were involved in the abduction and killing of two people of Pashim Karimpur and Debipur villages on September 13, as per the second charge.

The third says Amir and Abul Kalam were involved in the abduction, torture and killing of at least nine people of Ramharitaluk, Debipur and Uttar Chakla villages on the same day.

The prosecution produced 15 witnesses including the investigation officer of the case and some documents to prove the charges. However, defence counsels declined to produce any witness in the case.

ICT-1 shocked at death of plane crash

The International Crimes Tribunal-1 today expressed deep shock at the death of US-Bangla plane crash at Kathmandu .

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Md Shahinur Islam paid the tribute before pronouncing the verdict of the case against the four Noakhali men around 10:40am.

Justice Shahinur said, “We are expressing deep shock at the death of the plane crash and pray for eternal peace of the departed souls”.

At least 49 people, including 26 Bangladeshis, were killed when an US-Bangla flight from Dhaka crashed in Kathmandu's Tribhuvan International Airport yesterday.
