Remembering the first Victory Day
2007-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Md. Asadullah Khan
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-15488

Pakistani forces surrendering at Race Course Maidan, 16 December 1971.

Thirty six years ago, the misty winter morning of December 16, the day the nation now celebrates as Victory Day, brought the new found glory of Bangladesh. It was the day the whole nation had waited to see after nine months of untold suffering, brutal torture and genocide that the savage Pakistan army had launched to eliminate the ethnic Bengali nation and Bengali nationalism. The massacre taking a toll of about three million lives, was unprecedented in the history of the world.

Indian army General Maneckshaw's stern warning to the occupation forces through radio was being beamed around the country since the morning of December 15, 1971 asking them to surrender or face the grim consequences. The morale of the Pakistani army fighting pitched battles here and there, was completely broken because the entire so-called East Pakistan save Dhaka city, had already fallen to the Muktibahini-Indian army joint forces.

People who had no way of fleeing from the country suffered cruel torture and lost their near and dear ones in this barbaric ethnic cleansing operation resorted to by the Pakistani army. Naturally people in Dhaka city became euphoric at this first dawn of freedom, in spite of some uneasiness in the air. By early morning of December 16 it was almost clear that Pakistani army would surrender. Till then the Indian jet planes were shelling strategic targets in Dhaka, mainly the Dhaka University halls and cantonment area where the Pakistani army had holed up.

People came out of their houses and hideouts in different areas of the city early morning, most of them with their portable radio sets  in hands and their ears plugged to broadcasts from Indian radio that was intermittently broadcasting news bulletins and informing the nation about the venue and time for surrender. Hotel Intercontinental, now called Sheraton, was first selected as the venue, but it was later shifted to Race Course Maidan, now called Suhrawardy Uddyan.  At 3 pm Lt. General Jagjit Singh Aurora, C-in- C of Eastern Command of the Indian army, took the surrender of Lt. Gen. A.K. Niazi of the Pakistani army, his own batch mate in the army in the pre-partition days.

Vast crowds of people along with Muktibahini fighters from every corner of the city, were out on the streets rejoicing at this historic moment. Collecting in front of the Hotel Inter Continental from the early hours of the 16th morning, oblivious of the random shooting by the vanquished and demoralised occupation army from here and there, people made a beeline to the hotel premises. The atmosphere was electrifying.

People in the country especially in Dhaka city greeted the long awaited news of victory with a sense of great relief. Dhaka city streets reverberated with the sound of machine gun bullets being fired in the air by the freedom fighters in jubilation. It was as if after nine months of birth pang the baby nation was born to discover its new identity. By 11 a.m. the crowd swelled, with the Muktijoddhas joining them after nine months on this gala occasion.

Totally oblivious of the hazards of the stray shootings, enthusiastic citizens from all over the city thronged the front terrace of the Intercontinental Hotel to witness that humiliating and long awaited surrender. Tears welled up in many eyes while reflecting on the fierce struggle, suffering, atrocities and deaths they had to encounter to win this freedom.

With the jubilation going all around, an eerie situation dampened the festive mood. Possibly with orders from their command, the Pakistani troops, as I watched from the Intercom road intersection, were marching towards the Dhaka cantonment with their heads down and faces red with rage and anger. As usual in such a situation, Muktisenas and  people long seething with rage and anger for the inhuman brutalities they suffered during these nine months were trying to mock at these  troops, of course, from a distance. The crack troops suddenly started firing at the crowd and at the same time, as a very sheer God-sent coincidence an open Indian jeep driven by a brigadier, flying a white flag, followed by two convoys of troops reached the hotel intersection. It is worth mentioning here that it was the first Indian army contingent reaching the heart of the city on 16th December.

Shooting by the Pakistani troops positioned on the ground floor of the Sakura restaurant building and its backyard was so random, sporadic and intense that the brigadier, a Sikh as evidenced by his appearance, got bewildered for sometime. After waiting for one or two minutes when he watched the situation taking a menacing turn and the lives of people in total danger, he ordered his troops to take position and frustrate the attacking Pakistani troops.

Even in such a melee and hazardous situation, enthusiastic and jubilant young men of my age went near the brigadier's jeep to give him a standing ovation. All of a sudden a stream of bullets from the Pakistani forces smashed the front window pane of the brigadier's jeep. Luckily the brigadier and some of us who were embracing him as an expression of gratitude and rejoicing standing a few steps away from the jeep survived the firing at the final hour of the victory. Instructing us to go inside the Inter Continental Hotel, declared as a neutral zone, the smart looking brigadier Balbir Singh, whose name I still remember after passage of 36 years, went into action.

Meanwhile, apprehending trouble and damage to property and lives of the boarders and others at the Inter Continental Hotel, the management closed its front gate. Many of us on that fateful morning jumped over the waist high compound wall and took shelter in the hotel lobby. After about 30 minutes firing from both sides stopped and the Pakistani troops again started marching towards the cantonment. When the situation calmed down, we came out of the hotel and saw some Pakistani soldiers lying dead in front of the Minto Road crossing, Ramna garden boundary wall and Sakura premises.

I was then an assistant professor in the dept. of physics at BUET (till then EPUET), just in my 30s and scared of the Pak army who engaged Razakars to identify young patriotic teachers, journalists and doctors and a host of other patriotic elements to achieve their objective of cleansing. I had left my residence in the BUET campus on March 27 and was moving from one place to another with my wife and young children. What I had witnessed during these nine months still sends chill through my bones. And if this is not genocide but simply a civil war as former NBR chief Shah Abdul Hannan affirmed in a TV talk show some days earlier, then we have to find a new dictionary meaning of genocide. If Shah Abdul Hannan and his ilk   are still harbouring any illusion about the genocide carried out by the occupation army and down playing the liberation war, they must take a glance at the full page article titled 'Genocide' published in the Sunday Times on June 13 and another article 'Pogrom in Pakistan' on  June 20 in 1971.

The Sunday Times in its article 'Genocide' wrote "General Yahya Khan's military government is pushing through its own 'final solution' of the East Bengal problem. Quoting the occupation army sources of the day it further added " We are determined to cleanse once and for all of the threat of secession, even if it means killing off two million people and ruling the province as a colony for 30 years. The occupation army in the then East Pakistan was doing exactly that with a terrifying thoroughness."

As it happens in the life of every person who had lost his near and dear ones during these months of brutalities, I was perturbed by the thoughts jolting me at this dawn of freedom. I was lucky to have survived the marauders' bullet but my eldest brother, about 45 years old in 1971, and my brother-in-law and a close friend of mine since our school days Major Mahdiuz Zaman Khan of Satkhira, then working at DGFI wing at Comilla cantonment could not survive.

Major Zaman, a grand son of Moulana Md. Akram Khan, founder-editor of now- defunct the Daily Azad, had a tall and well-built structure with a distinct fair complexion. If any one had looked at him without hearing him, he would have mistaken him as one belonging to a Punjabi  (West Pakistan) race. It is intriguing that they could kill a man having so much resemblance to them, and whose grand father was one of the pioneers of Pakistan movement. Major Zaman was summoned on a plea to attend an emergency meeting at Comilla cantonment on the morning of 27th March, 1971 and was shot dead along with other Bengali officers.

My eldest brother, an ex infantryman in the second World War was picked up from his business premises at Satkhira on May 13 at the instance of the Razakars accompanying the occupation army in the vehicle and he never returned. We could not know how and where he was killed.

While the whole country, and successive governments remain busy in celebrating the memorable occasion year in and year out, our thoughts go back to those days of atrocities and genocide carried out by the occupation army with exact thoroughness. After my brother's killing in May, 1971 when I travelled to Satkhira to be with the bereaved family members, risking the most hazardous road journey, meeting crack forces' interrogation at several points, I saw village after village devastated and houses burnt and razed to the ground by the occupation forces.

Now Bangladesh is a reality for three and half decades, even if the anti-liberation elements have not accepted it and continue to hatch conspiracy at every step and as such the country slides in a state of turmoil. At the annual event of " Victory Day," the nation must redeem the pledges that people belonging to all ranks, regardless of caste and creed, made to free this country of exploitation, religious bigotry, poverty and violence of all types.

Md. Asadullah Khan is a former teacher of physics and Controller of Examinations, BUET.
