MARCH 25, 1971: Pakistan army unleashes terror
2018-03-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/march-25-1971-pakistan-army-unleashes-terror-1553008

Bangladesh witnessed a deadliest night. Around 11:00pm, the army pounced on sleeping citizens of Dhaka.

Military authorities looted and murdered innocent Bangladeshis fighting for their freedom. In military terms it is known as “Operation Searchlight”.

In the evening, Yahya Khan quietly left Bangladesh without any word.

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman called a general strike throughout Bangladesh for March 27 as a mark of protest against heavy firing upon the civilian population in Saidpur, Rangpur and Joydevpur.

“Only way out is to accept Awami League's demands”, read a statement issued by Sheikh Mujib.

In a press conference in Dhaka, ZA Bhutto said that the quantum of autonomy sought by the Awami League was something which could be termed as “more than autonomy”.

“It was bordering on sovereignty,” Bhutto said.

At 1:00am on March 26, troops from 22nd Beluch Regiment headed out as ordered and attacked Pilkhana EPR. Even though there were 18 Bangladeshi guards, they were powerless in the face of such atrocities.

As soon as Pilkhana was attacked, entire Dhaka, including Rajarbagh, Dhaka University and Shankhari Bazar, came under attacks. Throughout the night, this massacre continued: women were raped, houses burned and looted and countless people killed.

By midnight of March 25, Dhaka was literally burning; especially the Hindu dominated eastern part of the city. Although the violence focused on the provincial capital, Dhaka, the process of ethnic elimination was also carried out all around Bangladesh. Hindu areas all over Bangladesh suffered heavy blows.

After midnight, one group of Pakistani occupation forces came across a barricade in Shukrabaad near Bangabandhu's residence. Breaking the barriers, they reached his house and kept firing shots until they captured him at 1:30am on March 26 and took him to the Sher-e-Bangla military office premises.

Source: Liberation War Museum and Bangladesh Genocide Archive
