Take country forward with Liberation War spirit
2018-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/take-bangladesh-forward-with-liberation-war-1971-spirit-1553491

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday urged all to work together in a planned way so that the country's march ahead with the Liberation War spirit never stops.

“I want Bangladesh to move forward with the Liberation War spirit and this journey must not be stopped as we want to make the country a middle-income one by 2021 and developed one by 2041,” she said.

The PM was speaking at the distribution ceremony of Independence Award-2018, the highest civilian honour of the country.

She handed over the awards to the recipients at a function organised by the Cabinet Division at Osmani Memorial Auditorium.

This year, 18 distinguished personalities received the award in recognition of their outstanding contributions to their respective fields.

Hasina said it was a dream of the Father of the Nation to fulfil the basic rights of people. “To me, remaining in power means discharging my responsibilities to the people, building the country with the great Liberation War spirit, and making it a poverty- and hunger-free one as dreamt by the Father of the Nation.”

Congratulating the award recipients, the premier said the Independence Award would inspire the new generation and take the country forward with new enthusiasm.

She mentioned that the government felt honoured by rewarding heroes who contribute to the nation and development of the country.

Sheikh Rehana, the youngest daughter of the Father of the Nation, deputy speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad, PM's advisers and parliament members, among others, were present on the occasion.

The 12 award recipients in the Independence and Liberation War category are: Quazi Zakir Hasan (posthumous), Shaheed SMA Rashidul Hasan (posthumous), Shankar Govinda Chowdhury (posthumous), former air vice-marshal Sultan Mahmud Bir Uttam, M Abdur Rahim (posthumous), Bhupati Bhusan Chowdhury alias Manik Chowdhury (posthumous), Shaheed Lieutenant Mohammad Anwarul Azim (posthumous), Humayun Rashid Chowdhury (posthumous), Shaheed Amanullah Mohammad Asaduzzaman (posthumous), Shaheed Motiur Rahman Mallik (posthumous), Shaheed Sergeant Zahurul Haq (posthumous) and Amzadul Haq.

Cultural Affairs Minister Asaduzzaman Noor was awarded for his contributions to culture. Channel i Director Shykh Seraj received award in agriculture journalism, Prof Dr AKMD Ahsan Ali in medicine, Prof AK Azad Khan in social service, Selina Hossain in literature and M Abdul Mazid in food security.
