Mujibnagar Day today
2018-04-17T00:00:00+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/mujibnagar-day-today-1563505

The nation is observing the historic Mujibnagar Day today to recall the oath-taking of the country's first government in 1971.

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday issued messages, marking the day.

In his message, the president said the country had achieved independence through a nine-month struggle on December 16, 1971 under the leadership of the Mujibnagar government.

Nations from across the world had extended their support and cooperation to the Bangalee nation due to constitution of the Mujibnagar government, he added.

The president hoped the present generation would be able to know the real history of the Liberation War through observing the Mujibnagar Day.

Hasina in her message said the first government of the independent Bangladesh had taken oath in Meherpur's Boidhyanathtala and endorsed the proclamation of independence. The historic place was recognised as Mujibnagar from that day, she added.

Different programmes will be organised in Dhaka and Mujibnagar to mark the day. The events include hoisting of the national and party flags at all the district and central offices of the Awami League and at Bangabandhu Bhaban at 6:00am, and placing of floral wreaths at the portrait of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at Bangabandhu Bhaban at 7:00am.

Floral wreaths will be placed at Mujibnagar Memorial Monument at 10:00am.

Mujibnagar Day rally will be held at Sheikh Hasina Mancha of Mujibnagar at 10:30am. Health and Family Welfare Minister Mohammed Nasim, also an AL presidium member, will preside over the meeting while Industries Minister Amir Hossain Amu will speak as chief guest.

Besides, the Dhaka north and south city Awami League will jointly organise a discussion at Bangabandhu International Conference Centre. AL General Secretary Obaidul Quader will attend the programme as chief guest.

HT Imam, political adviser to the prime minister, said, “Prime minister Tajuddin Ahmad of the then government in exile delivered an address via Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra on April 11 and April 17 was fixed for taking oath of the country's first government.”

On April 17, 1971, the tiny village in Baidyanathtala witnessed the formation of the provisional government of Bangladesh. Millions of freedom loving people listened to the announcement of the formation of the government over radio.
