Liberation War-era tank recovered from Karatoa
2018-05-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Dinajpur
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/liberation-war-era-tank-recovered-karatoa-1572121

An armoured tank, which was found underwater in the Karatoa River in Pirganj upazila of Rangpur a week ago, was brought to the shore on Friday night.

Recovery operation of the Liberation War-era tank ended around 11:00pm on Friday, said Komol Kumar Ghosh, upazila nirbahi officer (UNO) of Pirganj upazila in Rangpur.

Earlier in the day, the labourers started their work, said the UNO.

“The body of the tank and part of its cannon were recovered and brought to the shore,” said the UNO. The labourers separated the tank and brought them to the shore of the Karatoa part by part, said Komol Kumar Ghosh.

As the news spread, curious people of surrounding villages of the area gathered at Kanchdah Ghat of Karatoa to have a glimpse of the tank on Saturday, which was used by the Indian allied forces during the Liberation War in 1971.

Locals of the area found the tank during sand dredging on April 27.

Enamul Haque, deputy commissioner of Rangpur, visited the spot that day and told journalists that his administration would take steps to recover the tank and put it on display as a memorial of the Liberation War.

Abdus Sattar, commander of Pirganj Muktijoddha Sangsad, had earlier told The Daily Star that nine tanks entered Bangladesh from Hili of Dinajpur during the Liberation War in 1971. One of the tanks got stuck in quicksand near Kanchdah Ghat while crossing the river Karatoa. Locals and Indian soldiers tried for three days to salvage it, but failed. The soldiers took away most parts of the tank, said the freedom fighter.

Local resident Altab Hossain, 75, said the tank was visible in the river Karatoa for more than four years after the end of Liberation War. Some people came here from Bogra then and took away most parts, he remembered.

He saw the tank again around 15 years ago at the same place, said the 75-year-old man. “This tank could be recovered undamaged if timely steps were taken,” he added.
