Instil spirit of Liberation War in the youth
2018-05-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/instil-spirit-liberation-war-the-youth-1583146

President Abdul Hamid, on Monday, said the children, adolescent and youth should be imbued with the spirit of the Liberation War and non-communalism to protect them from the poison of fanaticism, communalism, drugs, and terrorism.

“Cultural activities play a vital role in instilling discipline, nationalism, and communal harmony among the adolescent and youth,” he said.

“We have to inform them that there's no place for militancy or communalism in our beloved motherland, as we have a long tradition of communal harmony. I firmly believe cultural activities will play an important role in grooming the future generation as a modern, culture-oriented and creative nation,” he added.

The president came up with the remarks while giving away 'Bangladesh Shilpakala Padak 2017' at Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy (BSA) auditorium.

He also underscored the need for taking Bangladesh's culture to the rest of the world.

Mentioning the courageous role of the cultural personalities in inspiring the masses during the Language Movement and the Liberation War, Abdul Hamid said, “Their role is always praiseworthy and exemplary. Cultural activists played a bold role in need or crisis of the nation.”

Turning to the awardees, he expressed the hope that the awards will encourage them to make more contributions to their respective fields. “Young artistes will also be encouraged by your success,” he said.

He also hoped that Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy will continue its relentless efforts to uphold the country's traditions and culture.

At the programme, the president handed over the awards to seven cultural celebrities. Each awardee received a cheque for Tk 1 lakh, a certificate and a gold medal.

The awardees are Aluddin Mia in instrumental music; Sharmila Bandyopadhyay in dance; Nasir Ali Mamun in photography; Chandra Shekhar Dey in fine arts; Kangalini Sufia in folk culture; SM Mohsin in dramatics; and Mihir Lala in music.

Cultural Affairs Minister Asaduzzaman Noor was present at the programme.

Shilpakala Academy Director General Liaquat Ali Lucky delivered the welcome speech. 54545454
