Workshop on mooting and the issue of genocide held at SEU
2018-06-11T10:06:48+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/law-our-rights/workshop-mooting-and-the-issue-genocide-held-seu-1589524

With an objective to enhance the art of advocacy and presentation skills, Southeast University Moot Court Society (SEUMCS) organised “Workshop on Mooting: Issue of Genocide” in partnership with Center for the Study of Genocide and Justice (CSGJ), Liberation War Museum, on June 6, 2018. Vice Chancellor of Southeast University (SEU) Professor ANM Meshquate Uddin chaired the workshop, while Liberation War Museum Trustee and CSGJ Director Mr. Mofidul Hoque graced the occasion as chief guest.

At the beginning of the workshop, a Mock Trial took place on a fictitious case involving genocide and international law. Later, Mr. Mofidul Hoque spoke on the issue of genocide outlining the historical context and evolution of the idea of genocide as an international crime. Mr. Md. Salim Miah, District and Session Judge and Former Registrar, International Crimes Tribunal Bangladesh (ICT-BD), shared his professional experiences while working with ICT-BD.

Participants from eleven law schools attended the workshop to get acquainted with different aspects of mooting. Among others, Mr. M. Kamaluddin Chowdhury, Member of SEU Trust; Md. Asaduzzaman, Chairman of Department of Law and Justice, SEU; Mr. Ayub Ali, Moderator of SEUMCS, Mrs. Mira Sajjan, Co-moderator of SEUMCS; and Mr. Jahid Mustofa, Senior Lecturer and Coordinator of Department of Law and Justice; and other faculty members as well as students of the University were present.

At the last phase of the workshop, the participants visited Liberation War Museum. Participants watched a documentary film related to the history of Bangladesh. Then participants visited various galleries of the Museum. Liberation War Museum has four different galleries each containing different messages relating to our liberation war. After visiting the museum, the participants attended a written test which was organised by Liberation War museum. At the completion of the visit, the successful participants were certified and prizes were given to best performers.

THE EVENT WAS JOINTLY COVERED BY MUSTAK AHMED SHIMUL AND ARSHAADUR RAHMAN, STUDENTS OF LAW, SOUTHEAST UNIVERSITY ( SEU).
