Three Habiganj 'Razakars' killed 2 freedom fighters
2015-10-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/three-habiganj-razakars-killed-2-freedom-fighters-160894

The first prosecution witness yesterday testified how three Habiganj “Razakars” killed two freedom fighters, including his elder brother, on November 11 during the 1971 Liberation War.

Mostor Ali also said 15 days before that, the accused and other Razakars took the Pakistani occupation army to the house of Col MA Rab, an Awami League candidate in the 1970's general election, and looted it and set it on fire.

The Pakistani army, with the help of the accused, Muhibur Rahman Boromian, his brother Mujibur Rahman Angur Mian and their cousin Abdur Razzak, raped two women, he told the three-member International Crimes Tribunal-1.

The sexagenarian witness said the Pakistani army went to their village Eralia Prokash Khagaura a month after the Liberation War began on March 25, 1971 and appointed Syed Nazrul Islam, a Nezam-e-Islami candidate during the election, leader of Peace Committee of Habiganj Mahakuma.

Later, Nazrul appointed Muhibur and his elder brother Kolomdhar Mian as leaders of Peace Committee of Khagraura Union, he said.

Mostor said after taking part in the Liberation War, his elder brother Akal Ali and neighbour Rajab Ali returned on November 11 and were staying in the former's room. “At around 4:30pm, Razakars including accused Muhibur Rahman Boromian, Mujibur Rahman Angur Mian, Abdur Razzak and Hamid surrounded our house,” said Mostor, adding that Razab attempted to flee.

“At that time, Muhibur Rahman Boromian shot at Rajab Ali with his rifle and other Razakars caught my brother Akal Ali. Hit in the belly, Rajab Ali immediately fell down,” he said.

Mostor said he watched from another room as Akal was dragged out by Razakars blindfolded with his hands tied about three-four minutes later.

Akal's two wives begged for his release but to no avail, he said, adding that the Razakars took Akal to their camp, some 200-300 yards away, and tortured him inhumanly and that they heard the screams.

Quoting a neighbour, Torajullah, he said Muhibur, Mujibur and Razzak along with other Razakars took Akal to an unknown place that night and killed him.

Afterwards, the witness identified the accused in the dock and the defence began cross-examining him. Proceedings were adjourned until October 27.

The three accused are facing four charges for their alleged involvement in crimes against humanity during the Liberation War.
