Anarchy by students of public univs unacceptable
2018-09-02T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/city/dhaka-university-7th-march-bhaban-pm-sheikh-hasina-opens-1627516

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday said any anarchic activity by public university students is not at all acceptable as they are availing of the education facility with public money.

“Indiscipline is not acceptable. If anyone wants to get education from any public institution, he has to abide by the rules and regulations of that educational institution and act accordingly. That's what we want from the students as does the nation,” she said.

The PM was speaking at a programme marking the inauguration of “March 7 Bhaban”, a newly constructed residential building for female students inside Ruqayyah Hall of Dhaka University.

She said a student in Bangladesh avail of higher education probably at the cheapest cost in the world. “And all the education expenses are borne by the government.... Hundred percent expenses are provided by the government. I don't know whether this system exists in any other country in the world. So the students must honour the system.”

Hasina stressed the need for creating skilled manpower for trade, commerce and other sectors of the country. “With this view in mind, the government has taken steps to establish universities in all big districts across the country.”

She said the government has formed Bangabandhu Science and Technology Fellowship Trust putting emphasis on research works because no country can move forward without giving proper attention to research.

About the DU, Hasina said all the movements that gave something to the country and its people had started from this university.

She said Awami League runs the government with an ideal. “For me, power is not a matter of luxury and enjoyment.... Power is about carrying out the responsibilities given by the people.”

Recalling the barbaric massacre of August 15, 1975, the PM said the killing was carried out just to reestablish the anti-liberation force in the country.

Chaired by DU Vice Chancellor Prof Md Akhtaruzzaman, the function was addressed, among others, by Education Minister Nurul Islam Nahid, University Grants Commission Chairman Prof Abdul Mannan, and Ruqayyah Hall Provost Prof Jinat Huda.

Earlier, the premier opened the March 7 Bhaban by unveiling its plaque. She also visited the museum in the building and signed the visitors' book.

The 11-storey building has been built at a cost of Tk 88 crore. The high-rise, which will accommodate 1,000 students, has an administrative block, service block and a museum.

In the museum, photographs of the March 7 speech of Bangabandhu, rare photos of the armed freedom struggle of the Bangalees and information about women's participation and contributions to Liberation War have been displayed.
