Eight Al-Badr men face trial
2015-10-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/eight-al-badr-men-face-trial-162880

The International Crimes Tribunal-1 yesterday framed five specific charges against eight Jamalpur “Al-Badr men” for their alleged involvement in crimes against humanity committed during the Liberation War.

The crimes include abduction, confinement, torture, arson, plundering, murder and other inhuman acts committed in between April 22, the day the Pakistan army entered the town, and December 11, 1971, according to the charges.

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque set November 18 to start the trial with recording of the opening statement of the prosecution and testimony of their witnesses, as it found “prima facie” evidence of the accused's alleged involvement.

The accused are Ashraf Hossain, 64, Prof Sharif Ahammed, 71, Abdul Mannan, 66, Abdul Bari, 62, Harun, 58, Abul Hashem, 65, Shamsul Haque, 75, and SM Yusuf Ali, 83.

Of the eight, Shamsul Haque alias Badr Bhai and Yusuf Ali were arrested and produced before the tribunal yesterday. They however pleaded not guilty claiming themselves totally innocent.

The rest of the accused are on the run and would be tried in absentia. The tribunal has already appointed two defence counsels to defend them.

The tribunal asked the prosecution to provide all necessary documents to the defence, if not yet given, by November 18, while the defence have been instructed to submit a list of witnesses or documents, if any, before the tribunal by the same day.

ACCUSED BACKGROUND

According to an investigation agency, Jamalpur and Sherpur were the “nucleus” in forming Al-Badr, an auxiliary force of the Pakistani army. Ashraf, along with executed war criminal Muhammad Kamaruzzaman, and Kamran, all leaders of Jamaat-e-Islami's then student wing Islami Chhatra Sangha, organised Al-Badr in greater Mymensingh.

Sharif Ahmed, Mannan, Bari, Harun, and Hashem were also involved in Chhatra Sangha and turned into Al-Badr members, the agency said.

Sharif was a director of Islami Bank Bangladesh Ltd between 1987 and 2003 and executive and managing director of Bangladesh Publications Ltd, which owned the daily Sangram, between 1999 and 2013.

Shamsul Haque, as a Jamaat candidate, ran for provincial assembly membership in the 1970 election from Jamalpur and Yusuf Ali, also with Jamaat's ticket, vied for membership in the national assembly. But both were defeated.

Yusuf Ali became a national assembly member through a so-called by-election in 1971, the agency said, adding that the duo patronised the Al-Badr force in Jamalpur.

Police arrested Shamsul and Yusuf on March 2. Of the remaining six, Ashraf is believed to have fled to India and five others are on the run in Bangladesh, the agency told a press conference on March 24 this year.

CHARGES

In the first charge, Shamsul and Yusuf were implicated for “facilitating and contributing” to abduction, torture, murder, plundering, arson and other inhuman acts committed in the then Jamalpur sub-division in between April 22 and December 11, 1971.

According to the second charge, Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan, Bari and Harun were involved in abduction, confinement, torture of at least six men and killing three of them in between July 7 and July 22.

The third charge says Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan, Bari, Hashem, Shamsul and Yusuf were involved in abduction and murder of Nurul Amin, an Awami League leader and organiser of the Liberation War, on July 10.

In the fourth charge, Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan and Bari were indicted for confinement, torture, murder and other inhuman acts committed in a torture cell at Ashek Mahmud College's degree hostel in between April 22 and December 11.

According to the fifth charge, Ashraf, Sharif, Mannan, Bari, Hashem, Shamsul and Yusuf were involved in similar offences committed at a PTI Hostel torture camp.
