Teenage freedom fighter tortured to death in '71
2014-03-20T00:00:06+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/teenage-freedom-fighter-tortured-to-death-in-71-16405

Al-Badr men led by Mir Quasem Ali tortured a teenage freedom fighter to death at a camp in Chittagong during the Liberation War in 1971, a relative of the victim testified in court yesterday. Hasina Khatun, a cousin of the freedom fighter, Jasim, from Swandeep of Chittagong, is the 17th prosecution witness in the war crimes case against Quasem, the alleged Chittagong chief of Al-Badr Bahini, an auxiliary force of the Pakistan army. She told the International Crimes Tribunal-2 that she had learnt about Jasim'a death from those who were also held captive in the camp. Quasem, now a central member of the executive council of the Jamaat-e-Islami, is facing 14 charges of crimes against humanity committed in Chittagong during the war. He has pleaded not guilty before the court.

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan recorded Hasina's testimony before adjourning the case proceedings. On Sunday, the defence will cross-examine her. Jasim was a candidate of higher secondary examination from Chittagong College when he joined the war. He used to regularly visit her house at Bepari Para in Chittagong city, Hasina said, adding that it was an Eid day in 1971 she met him for the last time. “Jasim [on that day] requested me to cook scented rice. Though I didn't have much financial ability, I entertained him with scented rice. “When he left the house that evening, he said, 'Apa, please pray for us so that we can be successful',” said Hasina, choking back tears. Hasina did not get to know what had happened to her cousin until the nation's independence.  She stumbled upon Shafiul Alam, who had been held hostage at Dalim Hotel, the Al-Badr camp, in Chittagong, as she searched for Jasim after the war. She learnt from Shafiul that Quasem along with some other Al-Badr men had tortured Jasim and left him in a room in the camp, where he was also detained. Jasim was blindfolded then. When Al-Badr men left the place, Shafiul managed to untie the blindfold. Jasim was in a critical condition, and within a few minutes he died. Earlier, Jahangir Chowdhury, another prosecution witness in the case, gave a similar narrative of the incident before the court. Hasina said Shafiul had told her to talk to Saifuddin, who had also been there in the camp. Saifuddin told her that Jasim's body had been dumped into the Karnaphuli river and that he got to know this from Swapan, who supplied food to the torture camp. Hasina told the court that she had also talked to some other people and what they said was no different from Shafiul's and Saifuddin's accounts. Meanwhile, the tribunal completed recording the cross-examination of Qazi Kabiruddin, the first prosecution witness in the case against Syed Mohammad Qaisar. Qaisar, a state minister of HM Ershad's regime, is facing 16 charges for his alleged involvement in genocide and crimes against humanity committed during the war. During the cross-examination on the fourth day, defence counsel Abdus Sobhan Tarafder asked the witness mainly about locations and distances between different places in Habiganj and Brahmanbaria districts.
