Don’t cast votes for war criminals: Hasina
2018-12-14T22:47:06+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/bangladesh-national-election-2018/news/dont-cast-votes-war-criminals-bangladesh-prime-minister-sheikh-hasina-1673860

Mentioning that BNP has given nominations to war criminals, their relatives and corrupt elements in different constituencies, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina on Friday urged the people of the country not to cast their votes in favour of them in the forthcoming national election.

"They want to make those who committed crimes against humanity or their relatives, wives or relatives of convicts in the August-21 grenade attack and graft cases and corrupt elements as elected representatives. But the nation didn't expect it," she said. The prime minister further said, "People can never accept it. So, I think they should be more aware in this regard so that such criminals never get vote. I would like to urge people to never cast votes in favour of them." Sheikh Hasina said this while addressing a discussion arranged by Awami League at Krishibid InstitutionBangladesh in the city on the occasion of the Martyred Intellectuals Day. She questioned whether there were no other qualified persons in BNP and whether it did not find the qualified persons other than criminals or whether the party considers crimes as 'qualifications'. Sheikh Hasina, also the Awami League president, chaired the discussion addressed, among others, by party general secretary and Road Transport and Bridges Minister Obaidul Quader. Mentioning the names of Motiur Rahman Nizami, Mojaheed and Salahuddin Quader Chowdhury, the Prime Minister said those were made ministers by BNP were later convicted for crimes against humanity and their death sentence was also executed. "It's shameful for the nation that the flag, which had been earned in exchange for blood of millions of martyrs was handed over to them," she said adding that BNP perhaps has no shame. Coming down heavily on Dr Kamal Hossain, Kader Siddique, Mahmudur Rahman Manna and Sultan Mohammad Monsur for joining hands with war criminals and corrupt persons, she questioned whether they feel ashamed. Pointing at Dr Kamal's derogatory remarks about a TV journalist, the prime minister said, "Will the people keep mum if you tell them (Khamush) to stop mouths? The people will not stop their mouths." She questioned how they can contest the election with the 'Sheaf of Paddy' when relatives of war criminals will run with the same symbol. The names the prime minister mentioned as either war criminals, or their relatives and relatives of killers include Al Badr member Moulana Abdul Hakim in Thakurgaon-2, war crimes convict Motiur Rahman's son Barrister Nazibur Rahman in Pabna-1, war criminal HM Hamidur Rahman Azad in Cox's Bazar-2, Moulana Delwar Hossain Saydee's on Shamim Bin Saydee in Pirojpur-1, Masuda Momin Talukder, wife of fugitive war crimes convict Momin Talukder in Bogura-3, Rita Rahman, wife of Maj (retd) Khairuzzaman who is one of the killers of the four national leaders, in Rangpur-3 and wife of Lutfur Zaman Babar who is a convict in the August 21 grenade attack in Netrakona-4. Hasina urged the country's people not to cast vote for criminals so that they never come to power being elected as representatives. "Boycott them completely after identifying where they are contesting." She said if they can come to power again, the image and progress of the country will be destroyed. The development pace of the country will stop, she added. The AL President urged her party's leaders and activists to make the people aware of the criminals and corrupt persons so that they would not cast vote in favour of them in the upcoming national election slated for December 30. Terming the next general election as very crucial, she called upon the people to cast their votes for Boat in the month of victory to advance the country towards economic victory. Pointing out telephonic conversation of a BNP leader with an ISI agent, she said conspiracies are continue over the next general election. The prime minister said they want that the election is held in a peaceful manner on December 30. "The country's people will exercise their franchise in this election. We want so." Actress Shomi Kaiser and Dr Nujhat Chowdhury, daughters of martyred writer Shahidullah Kaiser and Dr Alim Chowdhury respectively, also spoke on the occasion.
