Homage to martyred intellectuals
2018-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/news/homage-martyred-intellectuals-1673911

At the fag end of the Liberation War in 1971, Pakistani forces committed one of the most shameful acts in history sensing their imminent defeat.

Aided by their local collaborators, they picked up the brightest minds of the Bangalees, including academics, doctors, engineers and journalists, from their homes at night.

Bodies of many were later found at Rayerbazar, Mirpur and a few other places in the city while the fate of the others is still unknown.

The mission was to cripple the newly-born nation.

One of the intellectuals was journalist Sirajuddin Hossain. He was dragged away from his Chamelibagh home on December 10, just six days before the victory.

His son Tawheed Reza Noor, who was only three when it happened, has no vivid memory of his missing father. “I grew up hearing about him from my mother and elder brother. I miss him every single day,” he told The Daily Star.

He, however, said he was happy that many of the war criminals, who assisted the Pakistanis, were handed down punishment.

Including him, family members of the victims as well as people from all walks of life placed wreaths at the Rayer Bazar Killing Field on the Martyred Intellectuals Day yesterday.

Projonmo Ekattor, a platform of the descendants of the intellectuals, formed a human chain at the place, holding a banner that read, “Don't want to see any anti-liberation forces in power”.

Speaking at a programme, organised by Sector Commanders Forum (SCF) nearby, its President Maj Gen (retd) KM Shafiullah, called upon the people not to vote for those forces in the December 30 national polls.

M Hamid, vice-president of the platform of the Liberation War sector commanders, told this correspondent that the more the young generation would learn about the martyred intellectuals, the more they would love their country.

Talking to reporters, Dhaka University Vice-Chancellor Md Akhtaruzzaman said, “The country is progressing in line with the spirit of the Liberation War. But we will be hurt if the anti-liberation forces hamper the journey”.

According to Banglapedia, around 991 academics, 13 journalists, 49 physicians, 42 lawyers and 16 others were killed during the nine-month war. In their memory, the nation observes Martyred Intellectuals Day every year on December 14.
