Don't vote for war criminals
2018-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/bangladesh-national-election-2018/news/dont-vote-war-criminals-1673923

Alleging that the BNP has nominated war criminals, their relatives and corrupt elements in different constituencies, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday urged the people not to vote for them in the coming election.

“They want to make those who committed crimes against humanity or their relatives, wives or relatives of convicts in the August 21 grenade attack and graft cases and corrupt elements as elected representatives. But the nation didn't expect it,” she said.

The PM was addressing a discussion, organised by the Awami League on the occasion of the Martyred Intellectuals Day, in the city's Krishibid Institution Bangladesh.

She questioned whether there were no qualified persons in the BNP and whether it did not find qualified persons other than criminals or whether the party considered crimes as qualifications.

Mentioning the names of Motiur Rahman Nizami, Ali Ahsan Mohammad Mojaheed and Salauddin Quader Chowdhury, she said those who were made ministers by the BNP were later convicted of crimes against humanity and their death sentences were also executed.

“It's shameful for the nation that   the flag, which had been earned in exchange for blood of millions of martyrs, was handed over to them.”

Coming down heavily on Jatiya Oikyafront leaders Dr Kamal Hossain, Kader Siddique, Mahmudur Rahman Manna and Sultan Mohammad Monsur, she questioned whether they feel ashamed of “joining hands with war criminals and corrupt persons”.

Pointing at Dr Kamal's remarks about a TV journalist, Hasina said, “Will the people keep mum if you tell them to shut up? The people won't shut up.”

She asked how they could contest the election with the “sheaf of paddy” when as of war criminals would run with the same electoral symbol.

The AL president urged her party men to make the people aware of the criminals and corrupt persons so that they would not cast votes for them on December 30.

Terming the next general election very crucial, Hasina called upon the people to cast their votes for “boat” in the month of victory to advance the country towards economic victory.

Pointing at the “telephonic conversation of a BNP leader with an ISI agent”, she said conspiracies continued over the next general election.
