An uncared for monument of the Liberation War
2018-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Dwoha Chowdhury
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/uncared-monument-the-liberation-war-1674223

In a remote village called Moheskhola under Dharmapasha upazila in Sunamganj, a monument was built in 2013 to commemorate the Liberation War and freedom fighters of the first sub-sector under Sector-5.

The monument is situated next to a small river, also called Moheskhola, where freedom fighters confronted Pakistani Army during the war and many lives were lost.

Inspired by the patriotic song “Shob Kota Janala Khule Dao Ma”, architect Rajon Das designed the monument, 27 feet in height, where windows are the highlight. The monument was built by the Zila Parishad of Sunamganj at a cost of Tk 1.21 crore.

Unfortunately, within five years of its opening, the structure is in dire need of maintenance.

During a recent visit to the monument, this correspondent found that the monument premises are being used to keep construction materials for a nearby site, and mold is growing on the walls, darkening the structure. People were also seen loitering about.

Architect Rajon Das said, “The design of the monument is now being exhibited in Paris, France as part of 60 architectural heritage sites of Bangladesh. The exhibition, 'Bengal Stream: The Vibrant Architecture Scene of Bangladesh' by Bengal Institute for Architecture, has already travelled to Switzerland (in association of Swiss Architecture Museum) and will be coming to Bangladesh by next July.”

“I have repeatedly requested the authorities for proper maintenance of the structure but it appears they're not concerned. I believe the monument must be maintained regularly before it is too late,” he said.

Md Billal Hossain, the union chairman of Bangshikunda Uttar, said the monument has become a hangout spot for the youths of Moheskhola bazar as there is no other public place in the locality.

“Though this monument should attract  visitors from near and far, communication to this part of the country is challenging to say the least. Regular maintenance is also not possible without support from the Zila Parishad,” he said.

It takes three to four hours by boat and vehicle during the rainy season, and even longer by motorcycle during the dry season to get to the monument.

Barrister M Anamul Kabir Emon, former administrator of the Zila Parishad, said, “During my tenure, I commissioned monuments in all sub-sector headquarters and several structures at educational institutions. The Parishad should have maintained them with the support of the government, as they are symbols of our independence.”

Obaidur Rahman, upazila nirbahi officer of Dharma-pasha, said the administration places wreaths at the monument on Victory Day and the premises will be cleaned by that time.

Nurul Huda Mukut, chairman of the Zilla Parishad, said they will consider regular maintenance of the monuments in the district soon after the national election.
