Four Biranganas honoured on V-day
2018-12-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Lalmonirhat
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/four-biranganas-honoured-v-day-1675093

Lalmonirhat District Women Sports Association accorded a reception to four Biranganas (war heroines) of the Liberation War.

They were accorded the reception at a programme, organised by the association at Lalmonirhat Government Girls' High School premises in the town, on the occasion of the country's 48th Victory Day on Sunday afternoon.

The four Biranganas are Gano Bala Barmoni, wife of martyred Freedom Fighter (FF) Dr Shashi Mohan Barmon of Teesta Baraitari village, Shefali Rani Das, wife of late Dhiren Chandra Das of Sahebpara in the town, Rezia Khatun, daughter of late Mafiz Uddin of Gokunda village, and Mosleha Bewa, wife of late Shamsher Ali of Shikartari village in Sadar upazila.

Poet Ferdousi Rahman Beauty, vice president of District Women Sports Association, handed over the FF allowance passbooks to the four war heroines after they were recognised as freedom fighters in April this year for their contribution in the country's Liberation War in 1971.

“We are proud of our freedom fighters, martyrs and Biranganas as we got the victory over Pakistani occupation forces for their sacrifice,” District Women Sports Association President Shahin Akter said.

“We salute our Biranganas for their unselfish contribution in the Liberation War,” the association's Vice President Shammi Akhter said.

While speaking on the occasion, poet Ferdousi said she came to know about the four Biranganas about four years ago.

She wrote to the ministry concerned to take necessary steps to recognise the four as freedom fighters after they shared the horror tales and the pain they went through during the country's Liberation War, Ferdousi said.

The four war heroines were very young when they were picked up by the Pakistani Army during the Liberation War and harassed physically and mentally, speakers said.

Although the country was freed from the occupation forces, their sorrows seem never ending, they said, adding that the four were maintaining their livelihood working as day labourers or housemaids after their families declined to accept them after the war.

“Pakistani Army shot my husband Shahi Mohan dead in front of me and forcibly took me to their camp,” Birangana Gano Bala said, adding that her husband was organising local youths to join the freedom fight.

“I have no words to describe what was happened to me at the Pakistani camp beside the Teesta Railway Bridge,” a tearful Gano Bala said.
