Dr Kamal supporting anti-Liberation War forces in the name of Oikyafront
2018-12-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/dr-kamal-supporting-anti-liberation-war-forces-the-name-oikyafront-1678123

Noted intellectuals and professionals at a rally yesterday alleged that Dr Kamal Hossain is supporting anti-Liberation War forces in the name of Oikyafront, and the alliance will turn the country into a “failed state” if it comes to power.

They were speaking from a rally organised by Peshajibi Samannay Parishad (PSP) at Central Shaheed Minar in Dhaka.

Kamrul Hasan Khan, co-chairman of PSP, vowed to cast vote for “boat” in the 11th parliamentary election to uphold the spirit of Liberation War.

“Awami League's win in the election will prove that Dr Kamal and razakars are hated by the people,” said Kamrul, also former vice-chancellor of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University.

Zeenat Huda, a professor at Dhaka University's sociology department, said Dr Kamal is deceiving freedom fighters by supporting candidates of BNP-Jamaat.

Golam Kuddus, president of Sammilita Sangskritik Jote, said that many cricketers of the national team are seeking vote for “boat” while one of them [Mashrafe] is going to contest in the election so that people can enjoy the fruits of Sheikh Hasina's leadership.

Cultural personality Kamal Lohani said people will give their just verdict against Dr Kamal's alliance.

Journalist Manjurul Ahsan Bulbul alleged that BNP's candidates have been “nominated” by the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) of Pakistan and that is why many BNP leaders, who are progressive, are now joining AL.

Among others, DU VC Akhtaruzzaman, cultural personalities Ramendu Majumdar and Pijush Bandyopadhyay, and former president of the Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI) Kazi Akram Uddin Ahmed also spoke at the rally. Representatives from Krishibid Institution, Bangladesh College Teachers' Association, DU Teachers' Association, Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh Medical Association, Bangladesh Federal Union of Journalists, Bangladesh Economics Association, among others, expressed solidarity at the rally.
