Swadhin Bangla urge recognition for '71
2018-12-28T14:27:55+06:00 | Anisur Rahman
https://www.thedailystar.net/sports/football/news/swadhin-bangla-urge-recognition-71-1679980

Members of the Swadhin Bangla Football team have once again appealed for recognition from the government as freedom fighters on the ground who played a role in building international awareness and monetary support by playing exhibition football matches in India during the liberation war in 1971.

The appeal was made yesterday at a reception programme for the Swadhin Bangla Football team. The Bangladesh Football Federation (BFF) accorded a reception to the team for the first time since January 2009, when the game’s governing body honoured the whole team with a colourful presentation.

“47 years ago, many footballers from the district level to the national level responded to the call to form a football team in Kolkata under Bangladesh Sports Samity and they played many cities of India to raise funds as well as public opinion towards the justification of Bangladesh’s Liberation War.

“Many years had gone but the members of Swadhin Bangla Football team didn’t get recognition from the government yet and we don’t know the reason behind it. We don’t want money; we want only recognition. I had earlier talked to the National Sports Council and  the ministry of Liberation War Affairs, who always made promises but did nothing. If Bangladesh Betar got recognition, then why won’t Swadhin Bangla Football team get the government’s recognition?” said Tanvir Mazar Manna, manager of the Swadhin Bangla National team at the occasion.

“Footballer Miraz and Jahir died during the liberation war and members of Swadhin Bangladesh Football team are passing away one after another. May be I don’t need the recognition but other members, who are not well-off, need the government’s recognition. So, I urge the government to recognize the Swadhin Bangla football team,” said Tanna, who was appointed as team manager at only the age of 20.

Of the 36 footballers and organisers of the Swadhin Bangla Football team, about 10 to 12 footballers and organisers attended the the programme at the BFF House yesterday. With some of the footballers having passed away, captain Zakaria Pintu and Vice-captain Protap Shankar Hazra were absent while Sheikh Ashraf Ali left the event after making a brief appearance.

“We have invited all footballers but some of them can’t attend due to illnesses. We arranged this programme in the month of victory in a bid to honour the team as well as to introduce them to the media,” said BFF president Kazi Salahuddin.

The BFF presented a blazer and some token money to members of that Swadhin Bangla Football team, with support from Toma Group.
