5 'Razakars' linked to 9 murders
2015-11-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/two-more-link-five-razakars-murder-9-168157

The third and fourth prosecution witnesses, like the first two, in a war crimes case yesterday linked the five alleged Razakars of Kishoreganj to the killings of at least nine people during synchronised attacks on four villages under the then sub-division on November 12 and 13 during the Liberation War in 1971.

Golam Mostafa and Mohammad Akkas, like Mehedi-ul Alam, a freedom fighter, and Adam Ali, son of a victim, gave similar descriptions to International Crimes Tribunal-1.

Meanwhile, the tribunal rejected a bail petition sought on grounds of poor health by Shamsuddin Ahmed, 60, an alleged Razakar, and asked the jail authorities to ensure his proper treatment.

The remaining accused -- Gazi Abdul Mannan, 88, the alleged commander of Karimganj Razakar camp, and alleged Razakar members Nasiruddin Ahmed, 62, Hafiz Uddin, 66, and Azharul Islam, 60--are on the run.

Mostafa said Karimganj Razakar Bahini was formed under the leadership of Gazi and the rest joined it after the Pakistani occupation army entered Kishoreganj on April 19 and Karimganj the next day.

He said the five and 70 to 80 other Razakars attacked Bidyanagar, Ayla, Fatehgup and Kiraton Bilpara villages on November 12.

“After entering Ayla village, these Razakars attacked the villages from two sides and opened fire indiscriminately. I witnessed this incident hiding inside a bush some 20 yards away from the Razakars,” said the 58-year old witness. Then they entered Bidyanagar and Faturgup villages, he added.

Later, he saw the dead bodies of his cousin Habibullah, Abdul Majid, Abdul Jabbar, Aftab Uddin, Sirajuddin, Habibur Rahman, Chandu Sheikh and Malek Sheikh in different areas, said Mostafa.

He said he also found with bullet wounds Hasu who told him that the five and other Razakars had picked up and shot them.

Mostafa said he saw Nasiruddin the next day shooting his uncle Mia Hossain after giving chase with other Razakars.

In his statement, Akkas said he saw this killing by a beel (wetland) near which he was working.

The day before, the five accused along with 20/25 Razakars killed seven to eight people, he added.

State-appointed defence counsel Abdus Shukur Khan completed cross-examining the witnesses before the three-member tribunal led by Justice Anwarul Haque adjourned proceedings until Sunday.
