Spread the history of Language Movement: President
2019-02-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Bss, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/spread-the-history-language-movement-president-1702687

President Abdul Hamid yesterday asked dramatists, filmmakers, writers, researchers and intellectuals to spread the history and spirit of the Language Movement among all.

He was speaking at Bangabhaban, at a special premiere of “Fagun Haway” (In Spring Breeze), a movie based on the 1952 movement

“The spirit of Amar Ekushey has become an inspiration to people globally, to preserve their respective languages and cultures... Spread the history and traditions of the 1952 movement,” the president said prior to enjoying the movie at Bangabhaban Darbar Hall.

Lauding the initiative of filmmakers and others concerned for their endeavour, the head of state said the film would help new generations know the real history of the Language Movement and the supreme sacrifices of the young heroes on February 21 in 1952.

“This will inspire the new generations to be imbued with patriotism, and gear up in the spirit of freedom struggle,” he said, terming the supreme sacrifice for the mother tongue a rare incident in the world.

“The Language Movement was only for the rights of mother tongue, but also it gave a new dimension in our drama, film, literature and culture,” said President Hamid.

The president also recalled memories of the Language Movement that subsequently expedited the 1971 Liberation War, under the leadership of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Noting that Bangalees are the first people in the world who sacrificed their lives for their mother language, he said the contribution of the martyrs did not go in vain, as some 193 countries across the world now observe International Mother Language Day on February 21.

The president said the present government, led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, has taken various steps to preserve as well as develop the mother tongues of minority groups -- including the tribal people.

Textbooks were also printed in their respective mother languages of indigenous people, he mentioned.

“Fagun Haway” director Tauquir Ahmed, Impress Telefilm Managing Director Faridur Reza Sagor and Director and Head of Channel i Shykh Seraj also spoke on the occasion.
