Jamaat should apologise for '71 role
2019-02-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/politics/nazrul-islam-bangladesh-jamaat-e-islami-should-apologise-nation-anti-liberation-war-in-1971-1704853

BNP standing committee member Nazrul Islam Khan yesterday said Jamaat-e-Islami should apologise to the nation for its anti-liberation role in the 1971 Liberation war.

Speaking to reporters after placing a wreath at the grave of BNP founder Ziaur Rahman, he also said their party wants the trial and punishment of all anti-liberation war elements.

"An apology by the Jamaat is now demanded by all. The Jamaat should be ashamed of its anti-liberation war role and should apologise for it. It's a logical demand," said Nazrul, also the coordinator of the BNP-led 20-party alliance.

Nazrul further said those who destroyed democracy, “the greatest outcome of independence”, should also apologise to the nation.

"We think those who committed any offence should offer apologies. We also should apologise to people if we have been involved in any wrongdoing. Unfortunately, such a culture is absent in our country," the BNP leader observed.

Asked about the media report about Jamaat forming a committee to launch a new party, Nazrul said it was the Jamaat's internal matter.

Replying to another question, he said the Jamaat is still with the 20-party alliance. "The Jamaat never told us that they don't want to be in the 20-party."

The BNP leader also said that the Jamaat, as a political party, has the right to decide if they want to quit the alliance.

About Chief Election Commissioner KM Nurul Huda's comment that the upcoming upazila election will be a competitive one, he said people have no confidence in the CEC.

"People across the country consider him an incompetent person and they accuse him of ruining the country's election system with his biased role in favour of a party," he added.

Earlier, Nazrul, along with leaders and activists of Jatiyatabadi Tanti Dal, paid homage to Zia by placing a wreath at his grave in Sher-e-Bangla Nagar in the city, marking the 39th founding anniversary of the organisation.

They also held a prayer for Zia's departed soul.
