Homage paid to language martyrs
2019-02-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/homage-paid-language-martyrs-1705783

International Mother Language Day was observed in befitting manner in various parts of the country yesterday, according to reports from our correspondents and agencies.

In Chattogram, people from all walks of life paid their respect to the 1952 Language Movement martyrs by placing wreaths at the city's Central Shaheed Minar.

The programme began at 12:01am with salute by Chattogram Metropolitan Police. Later, the city mayor, political party leaders and activists placed wreaths at the base of the monument.

Besides, students and members of different socio-cultural organisations did the same.

Singing the song “Amar Bhai-er Rokte Rangano”, thousands of barefoot people with flowers in their hands walked to the monument.

Different educational institutions including Chittagong University, Chittagong University of Engineering and Technology also observed the day through different programmes on their respective campuses.

In Savar, people under the banner of several organisations and institutions observed the day. They placed wreaths at Shaheed Minars on different spots.

Officials of Transparency International Bangladesh along with others, including students, placed wreaths at Savar's Central Shaheed Minar on the Savar Adhaor Chandra Government High School premises.

Besides, leaders and activists of several social and cultural organisations and political parties did the same.

Sammilito Sangskritik Jote members rendered Language Movement songs. Sacheton Nagorik Committee in association with Youth Engagement Support arranged mass signature campaign against corruption.

The Jote also arranged art and Bangla writing competitions where students of several institutions took part.

Savar Volunteer, a student-based organisation, launched a temporary school in Banktown area for providing education to streets children.

In Rajshahi, since early morning, thousands walked barefoot with flowers in hand towards Shaheed Minar to pay their respect.

Marking the day, city streets were decorated with national flags and banners inscribed with Bangla alphabets. Discussions, cultural events and programmes for children were also held throughout the day.

Meanwhile, a three-day art exhibition on Language Movement ended at Rajshahi University.

The exhibition titled “Muktir Suchona” was organised by Shilpojatra, an organisation of RU fine arts faculty students, on the university's central library premises.

Paintings, sculptures, and art installations of 30 artists were displayed there.

In Khulna, people from all walks of life observed Amar Ekushey and International Mother Language Day in a befitting manner.

National flags were hoisted at half-mast atop all buildings and educational institutions, and “probhat ferry” (morning processions) were brought out in the city.

Art and essay competitions for children were also held as part of various programmes, marking the day.

In Rangpur, socio-political, educational and cultural institutions arranged a series of programmes to observe the day.

The events included hoisting of the national flag at half-mast atop all government, private buildings and educational institutions, decoration of city streets, drawing and essay competition for children, feeding of the destitute and screening of documentaries.

Language Movement veterans were accorded receptions and special prayers were offered at mosques, temples, churches, pagodas and other places of worship.
