Language Martyrs' Day observed on border
2019-02-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Benapole
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/language-martyrs-day-observed-border-1705840

For the Bangla speaking people of the two neighbouring countries, it was a different day yesterday at Benapole border line.

Marking the International Mother Language Day, thousands of emotion-choked people from Bangladesh and India, carrying banners, festoons and placards started gathering on the no man's land since the morning.

They also enjoyed a fair titled 'Milon Mela' on the occasion.

Organisers erected a temporary Shaheed Minar, martyred memorial, to pay homage to the language martyrs on the border line where members of Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB) and Indian Border Security Force (BSF) greeted each other with flowers.

BGB members also handed over the country's national Flag to their Indian counterparts as a souvenir.

After placing of wreaths on the makeshift Shaheed Minar, a discussion was held at the venue which was presided by local Lawmaker Sheik Afil Uddin.

Separate delegates from both India and Bangladesh attended the programme and placed flowers to the temporary Shaheed Minar around 9:00am.

Marking the especial day, hundreds of people from both the countries donated bloods at a temporary blood bank set up on the no man's land.

Among others, West Bengal Food Minister Jyotipriyo Mallik, MLAs (Bidhaok) Sreemoti Mamata Thakur, Bishwajit Das and Surojeet Kumar Biswas and Bongaon Municipality Mayor Sree Shankar Addo, were present from the Indian side.

Meanwhile, State Minister Swapan Bhattacharya, Customs Commissioner Belal Hossain Chowdhury and Sharsha Upazila Parishad Chairman Sirajul Haque Monju, attended the programme on behalf of Bangladesh.

While speaking at the discussion, Indian Minister Jyotipriyo said, “I have come here to respond to the call of our mother tongue. I am overwhelmed to see the friendly people of the two countries observing the day together with honour.”

“Only people of this soil have set the rare example of sacrificing their lives for mother tongue,” MP Gopal Sheith said, adding that he hopes such gathering will bring people of the two neighbouring countries closer.

State Minister Swapan Bhattacharya said, "The nation will never forget the Language Movement heroes, who sacrificed their lives to establish Bangla as our state language."
