Instilling the spirit of Liberation War
2019-02-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Mathews Chiran
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/instilling-the-spirit-liberation-war-1706893

Lying on a bed, they stared at each other. One could count bones on their ribcages.

The photograph of the two brothers, both children, was published in a newspaper during Bangladesh's Liberation War in 1971. The brothers' passed away moments after the photo was taken.

The headline over the picture read: “It's too late for sympathy, they're dead”.

This photograph, along with books and other memorabilia, is on display at the Liberation War Museum stall at Bangla Academy in this year's Amar Ekushey Granthamela.

With posters depicting heroism and sacrifices, the plight of people and various newspaper clippings on the war pasted on the walls, the stall is not only selling books, it is also inspiring the young.

“These will help the youth know more about history,” said Fakhrul, an attendant at the museum's stall.

Yesterday, this correspondent saw people of all ages visiting the stall to buy posters, books and CDs.

“The stall is a must-visit for everyone, especially youths,” said Nuzaira Akhter, a master's student of Independent University Bangladesh. She bought a poster of “Concert for Bangladesh”.

Not just her, many were stepping inside the stall and immersing themselves in the glorious chapter of the country's history.

Right next to it, Bangladesh Post Office (BPO) has set up a stall, selling commemorative postal stamps as a tribute to martyrs.

Stalls at both the venues -- Bangla Academy and Suhrawardy Udyan -- are offering an array of books and memorabilia on the Liberation War.

Even the fair venue, Suhrawardy Udyan, is etched in history. It is where Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman delivered the historic March 7 speech in 1971 and called on the freedom-loving Bengalis to wage a decisive struggle against the Pakistani rulers.

Many publishers also brought out books on the Liberation War this year.

Some of the new releases are: “71 Muktijoddhar Ma” by Marzia Lipi from Abosar, “Bangladesh-er Muktijuddho” edited by Jatindra Chattopadhyay from Muktodhara and “Muktijuddhe Aat No. Sector” by Rajib Ahmed from Shova Prokash.

Books such as “Ekattorer Dinguli” by Jahanara Imam, “Jochhna o Jononir Golpo” by Humayun Ahmed, “Hangor Nodi Grenade” by Selina Hossain and “Nishiddho Loban” by Syed Shamsul Haque were still popular choices.

Meanwhile, Daily Star Books, books wing of the daily, is also showcasing books on the Liberation War including translation of “A Golden Age” by Tahmima Anam and “Sangrami Nari 52 o Ektattor (interview)” edited by Bashar Khan.
