Rigging in UZ polls undermines the spirit of '71
2014-03-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shakhawat Liton
https://www.thedailystar.net/rigging-in-uz-polls-undermines-the-spirit-of-71-17081

HECTIC preparations are being taken to set a new 'Guinness World Record' by singing of the national anthem of Bangladesh by approximately three lakh people on March 26 at the National Parade Square in the capital. The mega-event is being organised to celebrate the country's 43rd Independence Day and 'recreate the spirit of Bengali nationalism.' (Unfortunately, the government has triggered widespread criticism by receiving donation of Tk.3 crore for organising the event from Islami Bank, which was mired in controversy for its dubious link with war criminals. In face of growing criticism, the government finally backtracked on receiving the Islami Bank's money.) However, the event will take place tomorrow for sure and we sincerely wish it will create a new world record. Many of us, though, don't understand what exactly we will achieve by setting the record and how it will brighten our image at home and abroad and recreate the spirit of Bengali nationalism. This has triggered some questions in our minds. Will this world record inspire our government to genuinely uphold the spirit of Bengali nationalism? Will it generate in them a feeling of love and pride for the country, and lead us in right direction to transform our country into a Golden Bangla? Or will the government use this record to gain its narrow political purpose? There are some reasons for being skeptical about the government's motives for organising the mega-event. While we are preparing for setting this world record, the ruling Awami League has been trampling our voting right in the ongoing upazila parishad elections. Hell-bent on securing win for their candidates, AL men in many places captured polling stations, snatched and stuffed ballot boxes and ousted opponents' polling agents from polling stations. We, the people of Bangladesh who are empowered by the constitution to exercise our franchise to elect our local representatives, are being denied the right in numerous areas. The government remains silent on violation of our constitutional rights. Prime Minister's Political Affairs Adviser H.T. Imam has kept on claiming that the elections were being held in a free and fair manner. Some senior ministers have also lauded their party men for the better performance in the third-phase of polls on March 15, which were also marred by anomalies. The way they praised their party men leads us to believe that they in fact endorsed the unruly and unlawful actions through which our voting rights were denied. The importance of elections in democracy is enormous. It gives the citizens of a country an opportunity to choose someone they approve of, and it also gives them a right to freedom. Democracy is the freedom of expression and the freedom to choose leaders. Is what the government and AL men doing in the ongoing upazila polls for democracy? Is it strengthening or further undermining the country's democracy which still exists only in election procedure? The policymakers of the government and the AL must not ignore the truth that undermining democracy in fact undermines the spirit of our country's Liberation War. The spirit of our Liberation War is not something vague or rhetorical. It has been unequivocally stated in our constitution, which was framed within a year of the country's independence. The constitution seeks to establish a welfare State for all citizens. It represents the vision and values of its framers and was based on the social, political and economic ethos, and faith and aspirations of the newly born nation's people. In its preamble, the constitution pledges that the high ideals of nationalism, socialism, democracy and secularism would be its fundamental principles as these ideals had inspired our heroic people to dedicate themselves to, and our brave martyrs to sacrifice their lives in, the national liberation struggle. The constitution has made these high ideals the fundamental principles of State policy. And it announced that the State shall be a democracy in which fundamental human rights and freedoms and respect for the dignity and worth of the human person shall be guaranteed. The way the AL men have been rigging the upazila polls is far removed from the spirit of the country's Liberation War of 1971 as enshrined in the constitution. But the AL high command and also the government policymakers have astonishingly keep mum about bulldozing of our voting right. This also exposes lack of democratic practice within the AL. If there is true democracy, some leaders could have spoken out against the unlawful activities of the party men. Their silence only proves they do not dare to speak what they feel. Their silence allowed the government to stage the January 5 controversial parliamentary election by denying our voting rights. The party that has a long history of struggle for people's voting right should in no way endorse trampling of our constitutional right to exercise our franchise. The millions of supporters of the AL cannot endorse this. But the severe lack of democratic practice within the ruling camp has gagged all the voices. Is this democracy? Is this the way the ruling AL is upholding the spirit of the country's Liberation War?

The writer is Senior Reporter, The Daily Star .
