MARCH 24, 1971: Bangabandhu warns against conspiracy
2019-03-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/news/march-24-1971-bangabandhu-warns-against-conspiracy-1719508

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman categorically said they didn't want any more discussion. They wanted a specific announcement.

From morning till night without any rest, Bangabandhu continued to address many processions that arrived at his doorstep.

If there is no solution by tomorrow, Bangladeshis themselves will find it, he said, adding that no conspiracy can hold them back and they are united. Any decision, if forced on them, will not be accepted in any way.

“Whatever conspiracy you indulge in you will not succeed in suppressing the demands of the people. We would not bow our heads to any force. We will free the people of Bangladesh,” threatened Bangabandhu.

On the other hand, Tajuddin Ahmad, general secretary of East Pakistan Awami League, urged the people to be vigilant and ready to make any sacrifice to defeat the conspiracies of anti-people forces.

From March 23 to March 24 morning, the Pakistan army surrounded the Saidpur cantonment and neighbouring Botlagari, Golahaat and Kundul villages. It used excessive force, killing about 100 people and leaving around 1,000 others injured.

Curfew was imposed in Dhaka. The army along with non-Bangalees carry out arson and carnage in the houses of Bangladeshis.

Some civilians and the military got involved in a battle in front of Rangpur Medical College. Centring it, the army launched a massacre in the surrounding areas where shots were fired, killing 50 unarmed civilians.

In Dhaka, a meeting between the AL and the regime was held at the president's house in the evening. Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin and Kamal Hossain were present.

Briefing reporters after the meeting, Tajuddin said the AL was not willing to continue the dialogue for an indefinite period.

Sources: Liberation War Museum and Bangladesh Genocide Archive
