Working to build a prosperous future for children: PM
2019-03-26T13:17:21+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/politics/advance-country-being-imbued-patriotism-liberation-war-1971-1720597

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today said her government was trying to build a future where the children will have a beautiful, secure and prosperous life.

"Today's children are the leaders of the future. We want to groom our children that way. They'll work for the country imbued with patriotism and love," she told a rally of children and juveniles at the Bangabandhu National Stadium on the 49th Independence and National Day.

She said the government has launched satellite Bangabandhu-1 and introduced multimedia classrooms across the country. It is also providing free textbooks and stipends for students.

"You've to take the country forward and build a developed and prosperous Bangladesh," she told the children. "It was the dream of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman."

ALSO READ: Bangladesh celebrates Independence Day

She said the government wanted to free the country from terrorism, militancy and drugs.

The prime minister urged parents, guardians, teachers and religious clerics to convey the bad effects of drugs, terrorism and militancy to save the children from these menaces.

She asked the children to focus on study, sports, cultural activities and competitions. "Only education is not enough," she said, noting that the good health of children is also necessary.

"Their merits and creativity have to be flourished. They'll lead a beautiful life. That's our aim. We've started various types of competitions across the country for that purpose," she said.

She briefly described various steps of the government for flourishing children as worthy citizens of the country.

Hasina also highlighted various steps taken by Bangabandhu to reconstruct a war-ravaged country and for the welfare of children and juveniles during his three-and-a-half-year tenure.

The Dhaka district administration organised the rally where Deputy Commissioner Abu Saleh Mohammed Ferdous Khan gave the vote of thanks.

Before her speech, Hasina inspected a parade comprising various teams of students of the district's schools and colleges.

She later took salute from the march past by the students of various schools.

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Huq was present there. The prime minister enjoyed a colourful performance of the students and various artistes.

She inaugurated the rally by releasing pigeons, the symbol of peace, and balloons.

The prime minister also distributed prizes among the winners of the competition of singing the national anthem in appropriate tone and tune.
