Female freedom fighters open up about the Liberation War
2019-04-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Maisha Islam Monamee
https://www.thedailystar.net/star-youth/news/female-freedom-fighters-open-about-the-liberation-war-1726876

Recently, EMK Centre hosted the JudhdhorDine'rGolpo featuring a panel of prominent female freedom-fighters, Reshma Amin, Khuku Ahmed and Sayeda Kamal. The panelists shared their bitter-sweet memories of the Liberation War.  From treating wounded soldiers in the hospital to being trained for guerilla war, these women have contributed significantly in the the struggle for an independent Bangladesh.  "It was a dream to see our country on the world's map" shared Sayeda Kamal who was an art student at the time.

It was the immense love for Bangla and the people that awakened us and motivated us to fight for our nation." Khuku Ahmed became visibly emotional on recalling the agony she and her family had been through during the war. She was separated from her family at the time.   "I found a new family among these brave women who were ready to sacrifice their lives for our motherland. The sorrow and grief of separation was dominated by the satisfaction of being a true patriot," she said. Reshma Amin who was then a student of Music College shared some anecdotes as well.  "Everyday seemed like a new challenge. Creeping under borders from one province to another and helping the men in fighting Pakistani soldiers, I feel that women created positive changes" she said. Khuku Ahmed talked about Bangladesh's Independence Day. Radios aired names of people who attained martyrdom in the struggle and we kept crying, hearing known names," she said.

"We could not rejoice because we did not know what the future holds.  Many of us lost our families. We were happy that the war was over but uncertain as to what will happen to us" said Sayeda Kamal.

"I miss the youth patriotism in today's generation. We were ready to give away our lives and had the passion to serve for our country. I do not find these elements in the youth of today," added Reshma Amin.

Young students who were a part of the audience enjoyed the discussion thoroughly and were deeply inspired by the stories of the brave women.
