President, PM for upholding Liberation War spirit
2014-03-26T00:01:41+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/president-pm-for-upholding-liberation-war-spirit-17292

On the eve of the country's 44th Independence Day, President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina issued separate messages, calling upon the nation to uphold the spirit of the Liberation War and fulfil the dreams of the valiant freedom fighters. BNP Chairperson Khaleda Zia also issued a message, congratulating all Bangladeshis at home and abroad on the occasion. The national day programmes will begin with a 31-gun salute early in the morning as a mark of respect to the heroic struggle of this nation. The president and the prime minister will place wreaths at the National Memorial at Savar outside the capital at 5:57am, paying respects to the freedom fighters. They will be followed by the families of the Bir Shreshthas, wounded freedom fighters, diplomats, different political parties, and socio-cultural and professional bodies. The national flag will fly atop all government and private buildings, while important buildings and establishments as well as city streets and islands will illuminate with colourful lights. A children's rally will be held at Bangabandhu National Stadium at 9:00am. Bangladesh Shishu Academy will also host a programme at 4:30pm on the academy premises. National dailies will bring out special supplements while Bangladesh Betar, Bangladesh Television, private television and radio stations will broadcast special programmes. Prayers will be offered in all mosques, temples, churches and other places of worship across the country. Special diets will be served at hospitals, jails, old homes and other public institutions. The ruling Awami League has chalked out a two-day programme marking the occasion. The programmes include hoisting of the national flag and the party flag at Bangabandhu Bhaban and party offices across the country, placing of wreaths at the National Memorial at 6:00am and at the portrait of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in Dhanmondi at 7:00am and joining the crowd at National Parade Square to sing the national anthem at 11:00am. Besides, BNP, Jatiya Party, Workers Party, Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal, the Communist Party of Bangladesh, Gonoforum, Liberal Democratic Party, and other socio-cultural organisations also planned various programmes to mark the occasion.
