The colours and conscience of Independence
2014-03-27T00:00:47+06:00 | Zahangir Alom
https://www.thedailystar.net/the-colours-and-conscience-of-independence-17371

The entire nation rekindled the spirit of independence yesterday through holding various programmes in a festive mood. The capital witnessed a number of celebration programmes marking 44th Independence and National Day. Ministry of Cultural Affairs, different cultural bodies, organisations and people of all walks of life paid their homage to the martyrs of Liberation War, set a new Guinness Book World Record through the rendition of national anthem in unison and held high the conscience of Independence vowing to make Bangladesh move forward.

Liberation War Museum Marking Shadhinota Utshab 2014 and 18th founding anniversary of Liberation War Museum (LWM), a weeklong (March 22-28) programme is on at LWM premises and Jalladkhana Boddhobhumi Smritipeeth, Mirpur simultaneously. On March 25 evening, Trustee of LWM Mafidul Haque delivered the welcome address while Barrister Turin Afroz discussed on the title “Trial of War Crimes” at LWM premises. Members of Swarochitra Abritti Chorcha O Bikash Kendra presented a choral recitation while artistes of Boddhobhumir Shontaldol and Meherunnesa Girls' School and College rendered choral songs. Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendro artiste Indra Mohan Rajbongshi offered several solos. Later, Members of Universal Theatre staged a street theatre “Chharpotro,” written and directed by Mazharul Haque Pintu and Abul Hossein Khokon respectively.

Sammilito Sangskritik Jote (SSJ) SSJ organised a celebration programme at the Central Shaheed Minar premises where music troupe Bonhishikha and Satyen Sen Shilpi Gosthi performed choral songs while artistes of Charukontho, Projonmo Kontho and Kendriyo Khelaghar Ashor recited poems at the event. Members of Dhaka Padatik staged their production “Madarika Khel” at the venue. Written by Masum Aziz, Mizanur Rahman directed the play.

Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy (BSA) BSA arranged a two daylong ((March 25-26) celebration programme marking independence day 2014. Director of the Department of Drama and Film, Sara Ara Mahmud delivered the welcome address at National Music and Dance Centre auditorium. President of Street Theatre Council Mannan Hira discussed on Independence Day. Director General of BSA Liaquat Ali Lucky presided over. The event featured solo and choral songs with dance, poetry recitation and staging of a play titled “Rajarbag '71”. A Liberation War-based play tiled “Target Platoon” was also staged at National Theatre Hall of BSA. BSA repertory theatre troupe staged the production, written and directed by Mamunur Rashid.

Jagannath Hall of Dhaka University To remember the martyrs who fell victim to Pakistan army on the dark night of March 25, 1971 at Jagannath Hall of University of Dhaka, the hall authority organised a memorial programme at the Jagannath Hall Premises. Artistes and students of the hall painted the main street inside the hall with satirical images of the Pakistani army and their local collaborators. Several installment works displaying the brutality of the night was placed besides street paintings. The event featured lighting of candles at the mass grave inside the hall, illuminating of flame torches and a cultural programme. The students of the hall rendered several inspirational and patriotic songs. Guest artistes including Priyanka Gope, Mridula Samadder and Biman Chandra Biswas rendered songs while Mazumdar Biplob, Ananta Heera, Zahir Raihan, Ananyo Laboni, Fakhrul Islam Tara and Iqbal Ahmed recited poems at the event.

Prachyanat's Road Show Laljatra To observe the dark night of March 25, 1971, Prachyanat School of Acting and Design brought out a unique procession on March 25. Titled “Laljatra”, the procession started from the Chhobir Haat premises at Shahbagh, circled the street of DU and marched towards Shadhinata Stambha at Suhrawardy Udyan where the troupe performed two instrumentals. Hundreds of the people, including theatre activists, artists, students and regular city dwellers -- all in black -- took part in the procession. They held a large piece of red and black fabric, recalling those martyred on the night of March 25, 1971. The procession sang DL Roy's “Dhano Dhanye Pushpey Bhora” as it moved around DU campus. Over 50 members in the procession played musical instruments. Rahul Anand of Prachyanat conducted the orchestra and led the procession.
