He saved freedom fighters in Pabna
2014-03-28T00:00:36+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/he-saved-freedom-fighters-in-pabna-17599

The defence of war crimes accused Abdus Subhan yesterday claimed their client like a mother had saved freedom fighters in Pabna from the Pakistani occupation army during the Liberation War in 1971. “He [Subhan] was in the Peace Committee [auxiliary force of Pakistan army] in disguise and took risk to save civilians,” defence counsel SM Shahjahan Kabir told the International Crimes Tribunal-1 while praying for exonerating the accused from the charges brought against him. The tribunal however rejected the review petition after hearing both the defence and the prosecution and transferred the case to the International Crimes Tribunal-2 by exercising its power given by the International Crimes (Tribunal) Act, 1973. Subhan, who was the vice-president of Pabna district Peace Committee, was charged on December 31, 1971 with involvement in genocide and murder of unarmed people along with looting, setting houses on fire and complicity to commit crimes against humanity. The defence had earlier filed the discharge petition and yesterday was fixed for its hearing. After placing arguments on legal aspects, Shahjahan in his oral submission told the tribunal they had investigated the issue themselves and learned from people that Subhan's activities were normal [during the war]. Saying that Subhan was a popular leader in Pabna, the defence said their client even from behind bars was thinking of public welfare and setting up a 500-bed hospital in the district. “Everyone in the Peace Committee was not bad. From the prosecution's evidence it is apparent that the statements given before the investigation officer were fabricated and it will be proved during testimony,” he added. “I hope the honourable tribunal will review the indictment order and exonerate him from all the charges,” Shahjahan said. Justice Anwarul Haque of the tribunal said they had to proceed to the testimony record part to rely on the defence's claim. At this point, his colleague in the tribunal Justice Jahangir Hossain Selim said, “How can we decide without evidence that though he was in Jamaat and Peace Committee, he supported freedom fighters?” Shahjahan argued that they had carried out their own investigation to that end. Justice M Enayeture Rahim, chairman of the three-member tribunal, said, “Can we consider your investigation? Does the Act [International Crimes (Tribunal) Act, 1973] allow us [to do so]?” Shahjahan said his arguments on law points were enough to discharge Subhan from the charges. The defence counsel on law points said the charge was not brought properly against his client as per section 16 (1) of the Act. Section 16 (1) of the Act says (1) Every charge will state: (a) the name and particulars of the accused; (b) crimes with which the accused is charged; (c) such particulars of the alleged crimes as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused a notice of the matter with which they are charged. To counter the defence, prosecutor Tapos Baul quoted the charge No. 1 before the tribunal saying all particulars as per section 16 (1) of the Act were included there. The charge says Abdus Subhan, ameer of Jamaat-e-Islami's Pabna unit and vice-president of Pabna district Peace Committee, accompanied by local Jamaat leaders and Biharis, abducted three persons, who had taken shelter in a local mosque, on April 17-18 in 1971. The three were later killed before him, the charge adds. The defence also claimed superior responsibility and liability of Joint Command Enterprise (JCE) would not fall upon their client. Tapos said the superior responsibility and JCE had been extensively discussed in the verdicts of nine war crimes cases delivered by the tribunals. Subhan, who faces nine charges of crimes against humanity, was produced before the tribunal yesterday.
