1971 redux
2014-03-30T00:00:00+06:00 | Milia Ali
https://www.thedailystar.net/1971-redux-17812

For Bangla-deshis, February is an emotional roller coaster ride of memories -- of the language movement that culminated into a struggle for the Bengali identity. But March? … Shakespeare's soothsayer warned Julius Caesar of the “Ides of March” cautioning him of a potential catastrophe. Although no warning bells tolled for its people and leaders, March 1971 stands out as the most eventful and traumatic month in Bangladesh's history. Bangabandhu's historic speech on March 7 galvanised the Bengalis toward a unified movement for independence. But, the Rubicon was crossed on the night of March 25 when the Pakistan military unleashed terror on unarmed Bengali civilians. It was then that the concept of an independent Bangladesh evolved from a mere idea into a concrete fight for freedom. Some of you might be thinking: “This is going to be another long-winded piece on patriotism and the Bangladesh Liberation War!” May be! But isn't “now” an appropriate time to reflect and introspect once again on the basic values for which the War was fought? And, isn't self-questioning a positive sign for any nation since it helps reaffirm the core beliefs and commitments? These questions were provoked by a casual remark made by an acquaintance. While in the midst of a discussion about the country's current situation (the ICT, secularism, democratic freedom) I asked: “Are we making progress toward achieving the goals of our struggle for independence in 1971?” No sooner had I uttered these words someone retorted aggressively: “Let's not keep dwelling on 1971 and the Liberation War. Can we please move on?” As someone who lives in the United States, I am quite familiar with the culture of “moving on.” For instance, I admire the way people in the US accept election results and move on -- even in the case of a highly contentious election as the one between George Bush and Al Gore. As a matter of fact, as soon as the results are announced, posters are removed, campaign offices are wound-up, and most Americans switch to an overdrive to get on with their daily grind. However, there is a fixed feature in the American polity --the core tenets of the Constitution formulated by the Founding Fathers in 1787. The Constitution acts as the center of gravity in determining the country's course of action and in protecting the fundamental rights of its citizens. In the current context of Bangladesh the rather harsh advice about simply “moving on” gave me a jolt. Once my emotions had settled I asked myself: What exactly does “moving on” mean for a country with a history of a hard-fought independence and an unfinished agenda? Does it mean bulldozing one's way ahead unmindful of the principles of secularism, democracy and social justice that are enshrined in the Constitution? In any case, even if we were to “move on” we would need to have a framework to operate in, as well as a clear sense of destination, often referred to as “vision.” More importantly, there is a need for a pause at several parts of the journey to ensure that we are indeed moving in the right direction -- or else we may not arrive at any significant place! I realise that it's important not to dwell too much on the past. We must also be positive about Bangladesh's achievements in the last four decades. And there are so many -- robust economic growth, healthy social indicators, the vibrant cultural and artistic progress as evidenced by the success of the Literary Hay Festival, the Bengal Music Conference, the Dhaka Art Summit and not to forget the major sports event underway – the hosting of the T 20 World Cup Cricket. Surely, we have come a long way, but does that mean that in our urgency to move on we trample upon the promises we made in the past? I, for one, am not willing to move forward leaving the painful memories of the Liberation War behind only because they are painful. Neither can I “move on” forgetting the pledges we made in 1971: The promise of religious freedom to the Hindu woman who lost her husband and son in the Pakistan army's targeted killing of Hindus; the promise of a democratic country to the Muktijoddha who risked his life helping numerous people like me to a safe haven across the border and then walked back to occupied territory to fight for an independent homeland; the promise of a life of dignity to the young woman raped and tortured by Pakistani soldiers; the promise of justice and security to the orphan girl whose parents were butchered by Razakars because they believed in Sonar Bangla. How can we “move on” heedlessly when these promises still remain unfulfilled?

The writer is a renowned exponent of Rabindra Sangeet and a former employee of the World Bank. E-mail: [email protected]
