BNP will write 'true history' of 1971: Khaleda
2014-03-30T00:01:19+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/bnp-will-write-true-history-of-1971-khaleda-17842

BNP Chairperson Khaleda Zia yesterday claimed Awami League men in 1971 only crossed the Indian border but did not join the Liberation War. “The Awami League keeps talking about the spirit of Liberation War but they did not witness the war; they did not fight in the battlefield; they don't know what war is,” Khaleda said at the biennial convention of a section of Federal Union of Journalists at the Jatiya Press Club. She added AL men who claim to be freedom fighters just crossed the border. Urging newsmen and educationists to write the "real history” of the Liberation War, she said, "The younger generation should know the real history." The BNP chief said her party will take an initiative to write the “true history”. Khaleda, also the leader of 19-party alliance, claimed the ruling AL is feeding the people with “false information” on the Liberation War. Criticising the government for speaking against war criminals, she said there are anti-liberation elements in Hasina's party.

In this regard, she mentioned AL leader Mohiuddin Khan Alamgir. “He had served Pakistan government till the end of the war. Why he is free now? He should remain in jail on war crimes charges.” Without naming HM Ershad, Khaleda said he had come to Bangladesh during the Liberation War but went back to Pakistan again. But this man has been made special envoy to the prime minister. The former PM even said Bangladesh's existence is now in name only as the country is run from somewhere else. People of a particular country are working in Bangladesh, she added. “They [foreigners] are working here even without work permits, without renewing visas. The government is rehabilitating foreigners keeping our own people unemployed.” She further said the country's independence has become meaningless at present. Terming the government "illegal", the former PM said it was now urgent to oust it. She called upon Opposition Leader Raushan Ershad to quit the “illegal parliament” after offering an apology to the people. Criticising the March 26 programme titled “Lakho Konthe Sonar Bangla”, Khaleda said: "The national event spending a hundred crore taka was of no use. It was organised by hiring people with money. A Guinness record can't be made this way.

"We will launch a movement that won't require money to bring people. That mass upsurge will itself create a Guinness record by overthrowing this government." She added a movement will be launched for a fresh national poll under a non-party administration after the final phase of the upazila elections ends tomorrow. Khaleda also said all pro-nationalist journalists will get job once her party comes to power. “In the past, we made mistakes; we did not do much for journalist. But we have learnt from the mistakes. Jobs and employment will be ensured for all pro-nationalist media persons.”
