Witness narrates killing of nine by Razakars
2013-12-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/witness-narrates-killing-of-nine-by-razakars-1793

A prosecution witness yesterday testified that Razakars had killed eight to nine persons, including his two maternal uncles, before his eyes near Bhasa Bazar under Kachua upazila of Bagerhat during the 1971 Liberation War. They had also shot and bayoneted him causing grievous injuries, added 67-year-old Sunil Kumar Dakua, the 15th witness in the case against Jamaat-e-Islami leader AKM Yusuf, before International Crimes Tribunal-2. Sunil said the Jamaat nayeb-e-ameer, chairman of Khulna Peace Committee, an anti-liberation organisation, formed the infamous Razakar force in 1971. He, however, could not identify any of the Razakars involved in the killings. The Razakar force, as the Pakistani army's auxiliary force, committed numerous crimes during the nine-month-long war, as per historic and the prosecution documents. During his 18-minute testimony, Sunil of Bhasa village said 45 to 46 armed Razakars besieged Bhasa Bazar, where he was shopping, from its eastern side on the 30th day of the Bangla month of Ashwin. They forcibly took 20 to 22 persons to the nearby Maghia More, he said. "They cut my uncle Hareram Mandol's genital. Afterwards, they killed him charging bayonet and firing shots…six to seven other persons were also shot dead after being tied up with my uncle's dhoti," he said. Razakars then put him on the lap of the other uncle, Fanibhusan, and opened fire, leaving his uncle dead on the spot and him with a chest pierced on the left by a bullet, he said. Sunil then lifted his panjabi to show the marks of injuries inflicted by the Razakars by charging bayonets before they left. He said the locals had rescued him. The three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan with members Justice Md Mozibur Rahman Miah and Justice Md Shahinur Islam recorded Sunil's testimony before adjourning proceedings till today when Sunil will face cross-examination. Yusuf is facing 13 charges of crimes against humanity and genocide allegedly committed in greater Khulna during the Liberation War. Meanwhile, apparently annoyed with the continuous absence of a senior defence counsel, the tribunal asked Yusuf to decide whether to change his lawyer or be represented by junior lawyers or represent himself. "We think you are not being duly defended," said Justice Hassan, adding that Syed Mizanur Rahman remained absent since November 25 prompting the tribunal to close cross-examination of three prosecution witnesses. "Otherwise, we will provide you a lawyer," added Justice Hassan. Yusuf said he would give his decision on Tuesday.
