Birangona gets new house
2019-09-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Patuakhali
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/birangona-gets-new-house-1797436

A Birangona (war heroine) at Itbaria village under Patuakhali Sadar upazila has got a new house, as the officer-in-charge (OC) of the local police station with the help of the upazila nirbahi officer (UNO) made the arrangement.

Fulboru, 65, recently went to Patuakhali Police Station OC Md Mostafizur Rahman with an allegation over a land dispute and the latter learnt that the woman, tortured by Pakistani occupation army during the 1971 Liberation War, was listed as a Birangona.

Then he went to Itbaria village with the woman and saw the shanty where the widow and childless woman lives alone.

After settling the land dispute, the OC assured the woman, widow and childless, building a new house for her.

Then the OC requested Patuakhali Sadar UNO Latifa Jannati to provide help for the purpose and the UNO gave two bundles of CI sheet and cash Tk 8,000 from the office fund.

With his own money, the OC provided for the rest of the expenditure to buy wood and other materials and build a tin-shed house.

“I feel happy to arrange a moderate house for the war heroine,” said the OC, who handed over its key to the woman on Saturday.

After getting the new house, Fulboru showed all signs of gratitude and happiness.

“I feel happy that a Birangona got a new house to live in,” said Ayub Ali Matubbor, a local freedom fighter.

The name of Fulboru is included in the list of Birangonas in Patuakhali, said Nirmal Kumar Rakkhit, former deputy commander of the district’s Muktijoddha Sangsad.

On May 2 in 1971, amid attack by a group of 30 to 40 members of Pakistan army aided by local Rajakars at Itbaria, villagers including a good number of women started fleeing.

The brutal army caught several women including Fulboru, took them to Patuakhali Circuit House and raped them continually.

As Fulboru became senseless after days of ordeal, soldiers left her on the bank of the Payra river. Later locals rescued her and arranged treatment.
