On this day in 1971
2019-12-06T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/day-1971-1836391

DECEMBER 6

India acknowledges Bangladesh as a free and sovereign state. Indian PM Indira Gandhi declares it in the parliament. Following the declaration, Pakistan unties all diplomatic relations with India.

Pakistan Election Commission suspends the by-polls in ‘East Pakistan’ due to the Indo-Pak war. The election was meant to be held on December 7.

Muktibahini take firm position at Laksham, Akhaura, Chouddagram and Hili. Pakistan army compelled to retreat.

By the evening, Akhaura and Shamsernagar in Sylhet officially came under the allied force’s control.

The runway of the Dhaka airport completely destroyed by the allied air force’s bombing.

The 9th division of Pakistan army starts to flee from the break of dawn. A part of the division had to cross Madhumati River as allied force base was on Jashore-Dhaka highway. Another faction escaped via Kushtia. They try to destroy all the bridges as they escape.

Soviet Union (USSR) for the second time places veto against US’s ceasefire proposal of Indo-Pak war in the United Nations Security Council’s meeting. A Soviet spokesperson says that the USSR has deep concern about the war in the subcontinent and it is related to USSR’s security interest.

Some 11 members of the Security Council vote the US. Poland supports the USSR while France and Britain refrain from supporting either side.

Military Advisor to the Governor of East Pakistan Rao Farman Ali says that Pakistan is ready to fight defensive war against India. “I believe, our force can hold East Pakistan in the present situation,” he says.

Lieutenant Niazi orders his force to move out from Jhenidah and to protect Dhaka. He also orders them to assemble near the bank of Meghna.

That was however impossible as allied force took control of Dhaka-Jashore highway. A faction of the allied force continues their advance towards Khulna and another team headed towards Kushtia.
