Barisal, Patuakhali were freed on this day in '71
2015-12-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/barisal-patuakhali-were-freed-day-71-183916

On this day in 1971, Barisal and Patuakhali districts were freed from the Pakistani occupation forces.

Mukti Bahini (freedom fighters) took control of Barisal town, the then district headquarters and second largest river port of the country, by defeating the Pakistani army on the day, reports our correspondent.

Various programmes, including holding rally, discussion and cultural function, have been chalked out to mark the day, said organisers.

On April 25 during the 1971 Liberation War, the Pakistani army occupied the district town after an air raid on April 17.

The occupation forces then opened their regional headquarters and cantonment at the complex of the Water and Power Development Authority on the bank of the River Kirtankhola.

Pakistan-controlled local administration had announced an indefinite curfew on the night of December 7.

The following day, the occupation forces, numbering around 400, and some of their collaborators left Barisal through waterway as the freedom fighters surrounded the town and disrupted road communications.

Four fighter aircraft of the Indian Air Force had sped in immediately and destroyed all water transports, killing most of the Pakistani army personnel and their collaborators on the day.

In December 8, 1971, a group of freedom fighters, led by Sultan Master, entered from southern and western parts and captured Barisal Kotwali Police Station.

As commanders Nizamuddin and Mazid Khan, also entered the town, Barisal came under the control of Mukti Bahini by the afternoon of December 8.

Meanwhile, the valiant freedom fighters freed Patuakhali district from the Pakistani occupation forces on this day in 1971, reports our correspondent.

Patuakhali district unit of Muktijoddha Sangsad have arranged different programmes, including hoisting of national flag in front of Muktijoddha Sangsad complex in the town, holding colourful rally and discussion, to mark the day.

After the declaration of independence on March 26 in 1971, several battles took place in the district.

On April 26, Pakistani army with the help of local collaborators killed scores of people, tortured women and looted several hundred houses in the district town.

The freedom fighters and Pakistani occupation forces locked in a fierce fighting at Panpatti village in the district on November 18. At one stage, Pak troops retreated after the day-long fight.

In the last week of November in 1971, freedom fighters entered Patuakhali town. After the Pakistani troops left Patuakhali for Dhaka by a ship, the freedom fighters declared liberation of the district on December 8.
