Martyred intellectuals Day being observed
2019-12-14T10:36:39+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/martyred-intellectuals-day-today-1840210

Martyred Intellectuals Day is being observed today to commemorate the intellectuals killed by Pakistan occupation forces and their local collaborators just before the end of the Liberation War.

On this day in 1971, some of the country’s renowned academicians, doctors, engineers, journalists, artists, teachers and other eminent personalities were dragged out of their homes, blindfolded and taken to unknown places.

Their bodies were later found at Rayerbazar, Mirpur and some other killing fields in the capital.

Pakistani forces and their local collaborators committed the cold-blooded mass murder to cripple the emerging Bangladesh intellectually.

Among the martyred intellectuals are Prof Munier Chowdhury, Dr Alim Chowdhury, Prof Muniruzzaman, Dr Fazle Rabbi, Sirajuddin Hossain, Shahidullah Kaiser, Prof GC Dev, JC Guha Thakurta, Prof Santosh Bhattacharya, Mofazzal Haider Chowdhury, journalists Khandaker Abu Taleb, Nizamuddin Ahmed, SA Mannan (Ladu Bhai), ANM Golam Mustafa, Syed Nazmul Haq and Selina Parvin.

PRESIDENT, PM PAY TRIBUTES TO MARTYRED INTELLECTUALS

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid rich tributes to the martyred intellectuals in the morning.

First the president and then the prime minister placed wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial in Mirpur.

After placing the wreath, both stood in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the illustrious sons of the soil.

A smartly turned out contingent of Bangladesh Armed Forces gave a state salute while the bugle played the last post at that time.

Later, the president talked to the war-wounded freedom fighters and the family members of the martyred intellectuals and enquired about their wellbeing.

Flanked by central leaders of the party, Sheikh Hasina, also the president of Bangladesh Awami League, placed another wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial as the party chief.

The prime minister later went to Dhanmondi in the capital and placed a wreath at the portrait of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in front of Bangabandhu Memorial Museum, marking the Martyred Intellectuals Day.

After placing the wreath, she stood there for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memory of Bangabandhu, the architect of the country’s independence.

Flanked by central leaders of the party, Sheikh Hasina laid another wreath at the portrait of Bangabandhu as the party chief.

The government has chalked out elaborate programmes to observe the day.

Family members of the martyred and freedom fighters will place wreaths there before people from all walks of life pay tributes at the memorial in Mirpur and Rayerbazar Killing Ground in Mohammadpur.

Different socio-cultural and political organisations have taken various programmes. Bangladesh Television and private television channels will broadcast special programmes highlighting the significance of the day.

Meanwhile, the government has urged all not to use mikes and loudspeakers while observing the day to protect its sanctity.
