Martyred Intellectuals’ Day today
2019-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Agencies
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/martyred-intellectuals-day-today-1840129

The nation is observing Martyred Intellectuals’ Day today, marking one of the most tragic days in the country’s history when the Pakistan army and its local collaborators brutally killed the intellectuals just before their defeat in 1971.

The educationists, doctors, journalists and artists -- who were a guiding light for the Bangalees -- were instrumental in the movements against disparity and repressive measures of the Pakistani rulers, thus contributing to the Liberation War.

The intellectuals had all through been targets of the Pakistani rulers, who began killing them with the army crackdown in Dhaka on the night of March 25 and continued it throughout the nine-month war.

However, planned killing of the intellectuals reached its peak just two days before December 16.

On the night of December 14, over 200 intellectuals were abducted from their homes in Dhaka; the murders were initiated in Dhaka and gradually spread over the country.

The Pakistani army, with their local collaborators -- Al-Badr, Al-Shams and Razakars -- captured the targeted victims from their homes by force, and carried them blindfolded to designated torture cells in Mirpur, Mohammadpur, Nakhalpara, Rajarbagh and other locations, before mercilessly killing them.

Marking the day, President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina issued separate messages yesterday, paying homage to the martyred intellectuals. The president and prime minister will place wreaths at Martyred Intellectuals Memorial in Mirpur this morning, reports BSS.

Members of martyred intellectuals’ and freedom fighters’ families will pay their respects at the memorial and Rayerbazar Killing Ground. Later, people from all walks will place wreaths there.

Bangladesh Television and private television channels will broadcast special programmes, while newspapers will run articles highlighting the significance of the day. Discussions will be held at district and upazila levels across the country.

Marking the day, ruling Awami League and other political parties have chalked out various programmes. Awami League will organise a meeting at Krishibid Institution Bangladesh at 3pm today, presided over by party President Sheikh Hasina.

Dhaka University authorities will observe the day through different programmes.

Besides, different professional, social and cultural organisations have also chalked out elaborate programmes to observe the day, reports UNB.
