Preserving Memories of ‘71: Mass killing ground restored in Barishal
2019-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Barishal
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/preserving-memories-71-mass-killing-ground-restored-barishal-1840123

During the tumultuous months of the Liberation War, the Pakistan occupation army had turned the then Water and Power Development Authority (Wapda) compound in Barishal into a mini cantonment, which included torture cells and bunkers. Situated near the river Kirtonkhola, the Wapda compound was used as a hub for the army.

The compound had witnessed gruesome acts of torture, killing and rape. It was turned into a mass killing ground, the largest in Bangladesh’s southern region.

However, the war-time memories in this area were on the verge of being lost, as the compound was abandoned after the country was liberated. In 2017, Barishal City Corporation (BCC) undertook a Tk 3.31 crore project to preserve the Wapda compound, restoring the memories of 1971 and making it accessible to newer generations so that they can learn about the country’s history.

The compound includes two torture cells and two bunkers, while a memorial monument, open stage and walkway were added during the restoration work, said Abul Bashar, executive engineer of BCC.

The restored area will be open to public by the end of December, according to BCC sources. More sculptures and memorabilia will be added gradually, and the place has been made easily accessible for everyone, including people with disabilities.

Liberation War Museum and Barishal Sangskritik Sangathan Samannay Parishad supported the project.

Kutub Uddin Ahamed, commander of district Muktijoddha Sangsad, said Pakistan occupation army captured Barishal district town on April 25, 1971, and created their regional headquarter at the then Wapda, considering the convenience of its water and road connectivity. They then turned it into a mini-cantonment and used it as a mass killing ground.

Barishal town was liberated on December 8, 1971, and it was cleared of all remaining Pakistani forces by December 18.

We demanded that the mass killing ground be preserved and opened for the public, said freedom fighters and cultural activists of Barishal city.

MAG Kabir Vulu, a freedom fighter who was tortured at this very compound, said, “Every night at least 10-15 youths were killed by the occupation army here. They would throw the dead bodies on the canal connecting to the Kirtonkhola river.”

Cultural activist Syed Dulal, also one of the initiators of the restoration project, said, “This is the largest mass killing ground in this region and at least 3,000-5,000 people were killed and tortured here by the Pakistani army.”

“This initiative will help the younger generation learn the stories of our Liberation War,” he said.
