The guerrilla of Garo hills
2019-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Hasan Meer and Mathews Chiran
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/the-guerrilla-garo-hills-1840987

Every day at the break of dawn, Albert Mrong sets out from home on his bicycle with a bag full of medicines. He rides over the uneven terrain of Madhupur -- surrounded by banana orchards -- stopping at homes of worried villagers and giving them necessary vaccines and antidote for their cattle.

For people of Kakragani and surrounding villages, this 66-year-old man is a friend in need, as communications there still remain quite challenging.

But the rugged landscape, lack of basic amenities or everyday struggles do not bother Albert, who has been helping villagers for decades. He is, after all, quite familiar with the terrain and loves the land he calls home.

And for the love of this land, he took up arms around 48 years ago and fought for its independence in 1971.

But to get him to share his experience with this newspaper was anything but easy. These correspondents had to persuade his family members to convince Albert for an interview. They finally agreed and invited us to their home last week.

By the time we reached their tin-roofed clay house after a journey by bus, auto-rickshaw, van and foot, it was almost 1pm. The quaint little place is surrounded by wood apple, date, coconut and banana trees.

Albert was out distributing veterinary drugs while his wife, Alpana Mree, just got back from Kakragani Primary School. Seeing us, the headteacher lit up a fire with timbers.

“My husband always says he did not fight for any reward. We even had to force him to take the allowance [for freedom fighters] to support the family,” said the mother of three, as she chopped vegetables.

The clinking of a bike bell signalled that Albert was back from his daily round.

It was clear a hard life has taken a toll on his body, but not his spirit. May be it was the approaching Victory Day that motivated him to share his experience.

“I was 17 and studying in Mymensingh town when the war broke out. My father decided to take refuge in India. Our family along with many others went to the Garo hills of Meghalaya through Haluaghat border.”

But Albert could not just sit idle.

“It was April. Bangabandhu, through his fiery address, had already made the clarion call to fight against Pakistani occupation forces to achieve our long-cherished independence,” he said.

Albert, who was involved with student politics [Chhatra Union], said he was shocked by the brutality unleashed by the Pakistan military junta through “Operation Searchlight”.

“I mobilised other Garo youths,” he said. “There were around 40 of us, around the same age and eager to fight for the country.”

But he also had to convince his family, who were far away from the war. “I told my father he had more than one son, and could sacrifice one for the country.”

“We joined an Indian camp in Meghalaya and trained for a month. We were divided in three companies of around 100 each -- from surrounding areas and different backgrounds.”

Afterwards, they formed a base in a mountain beside Dalu village in Meghalaya, from where around 10-15 used to enter Bangladesh and supply arms to freedom fighters on a regular basis, he said.

“We conducted guerrilla operations from the hills. Our target was to disorient the opposition forces. We were quite successful at it too. We were agile and knew the terrain well. We blew up quite a few bridges, laid landmines and guarded the hills. Locals also assisted us in our operations,” recalled Albert.

As the war raged on, they decided to step up their efforts.

In May, around 53 of them travelled to Sherpur, and took shelter at a village.

“We were greeted by villagers. We had a hearty meal there after a long time. But after dinner, while resting, we suddenly heard loud noises. The occupation army had surrounded us. Someone must have tipped them off…”

“Bullets were flying everywhere. There was a canal behind the house; we jumped into it while they kept on firing.”

“We lost three of our comrades, including company commander Nazmul, that night. Many were injured. We had to swim almost the whole night, and were finally able to enter the mountains through the west.”

“After that, we became more cautious. William Mrong became our new commander. Dr Mrong recently passed away at a Dhaka hospital,” he went on.

During July and August, Albert and other guerrillas were able to successfully ambush the enemy in Tarakanda, Phulpur, Narandi and other areas.

“By the time it was August, we decided to walk around villages brandishing our firearms, to let people know that freedom fighters are with them, and are not afraid of the occupation army or their collaborators,” he went on.

“We did that for two weeks. There were 16 of us, including William, Sheikh Shawkat, Prottut, and me.”

The war intensified in October/November. “By this time, we were facing the enemy head to head with the help of Indian army. There were casualties on both sides, but we did not falter.”

“Though the Pakistani troops managed to enter Mymensingh town in late April, they never could capture the hills or bordering areas. We made sure of that. We always kept them on their toes with our sneak attacks.”

In November, Albert continued, freedom fighters along with Indian army attacked a strong Pakistan army base at Telikhali. “It was a planned and coordinated strike. We launched simultaneous attacks from three sides -- Karaitala, Baghaitala and Ramchandrakura.”

“I was part of a back-up party that guarded the east side. We fought the whole night. After one point, it was all a haze. I remember, I just kept on firing at the enemy from a bunker.”

“Around dawn, the occupation army surrendered. We lost many good men that night, at least 26 of them. Shawkat died in my arms. The enemy suffered heavy casualties too. Over a hundred of them died that night.”

After that fight, the tide started to turn.

Pakistan army had camps in Shalchura, Nakshi, Haldigram, Tawakucha and Mullah Para in Jhenaigati of Sherpur. “By early December, most of those were captured.”

On December 7, Haluaghat was freed from the occupation forces. The next day, Phulpur and Bhaluka upazilas were freed, followed by Gouripur, Trishal, Ishwarganj and Tarakanda.

On December 10, freedom fighters, led by Principal Motiur Rahman -- former president of the district unit of Awami League -- and Indian allied forces marched towards the district town and freed it.

“Then came the cherished moment -- December 16 -- we achieved our independence after a ninth-month Liberation War. It’s hard to express how we felt. We were shouting “Joy Bangla”, hugging each other and crying our hearts out.”

A NEW BATTLE

“I surrendered my arms soon afterwards. But there was also a sense of uncertainty. I just got back from a long war, and wasn’t sure what to do or how to cope with everything. After a couple of months, I decided to go back to college. Slowly my life started getting into shape.”

But little did Albert know he would have to take up arms again and fight another war.

“For me, everything changed in 1975. It was the month of August. We heard about the assassination of Bangabandhu and how Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed had grabbed presidency and declared martial law.”

“I couldn’t believe it. They killed Bangabandhu! I became restless. For the next couple of weeks, life was at a standstill.”

“We heard Kader Siddiqui and his followers were organising attacks on the Moshtaque-led government. I along with others decided to join them. Once again, we crossed the border and went to Assam and operated from a bordering base there. We were also supported by India’s Border Security Force.”

“The insurgency against the military government lasted more than two years. Over a hundred of us died and many more were injured during that period. But it was not coordinated like the Liberation War, and eventually lost steam.”

With the country not the same after the assassination of Bangabandhu, Albert decided to remain in India.

A NEW BEGINNING

For the next 15 years, Albert stayed in the neighbouring country. But he never stopped thinking about his motherland.

“Most of my friends decided to stay there, but not me. I always knew things would change. And it did in 1990 with the fall of Ershad and restoration of democracy,” he said.

Albert returned home on December 30, 1990. “I met Alpana soon afterwards, got married, moved here and started a family.”

“For over 20 years, I had been fighting for my country -- be it the Liberation War or the insurgency. My wife helped me with my transition to this new life… parenthood. I am a grandfather now,” he smiled.

Albert took a pause, looked around and heaved a sigh while a gentle winter breeze wafted through the banana garden. “It’s not much, but its home.”

“We were young and passionate... fought barefoot, did not have much to wear and went hungry most of the time… but we did not let the situation bother us. Our collective goal was much more important than individual difficulties.”

“Most importantly, we were part of a team. It was not an individual effort, rather a combined struggle for freedom.”

“Walter, Shawkat, Nazmul, Sushil, Amar, Dhiren, Chin… I lost so many brothers in the war,” Albert wiped his eyes quickly.

“I don’t want anything for myself… I did my part and fought for my country… but I believe there should be more research on the Liberation War so youngsters can know about it.”

“Many indigenous people have participated in the war, but little is known about them. Indigenous youths are also unaware of the history. They need to feel proud of us and the sacrifices we made,” he added.

By the time our conversation ended, it was almost 5pm. Alpana acted quickly, set up a table and served us food -- as humble and rustic as the ambience.

After a satisfying meal of sticky rice, chicken, vegetables and lentil, the couple guided us through the banana garden and helped us reach the road.

“I consider myself a Bangladeshi above anything else,” said Albert as he bade us farewell. “It’s the country I was born in and I would gladly go to war again to protect her.”
