Victory Day specials on television
2019-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/victory-day-2019-special-television-programs--1840744

As Bangladesh celebrates the Victory Day through numerous cultural events and traditional festivities, top TV channels of the country are set to air different special programmes today.

Renowned actor Farooque and singer Rafiqul Alam will participate as discussants in ATN Bangla’s talk show, Bijoy Kotha. Directed by Mukaddem Babu and hosted by Hasan Ahmed Chowdhury Kiron, the show will be aired on the channel at 11:30 am. On the other hand, the tele-fiction, Khoma Naai , written by Motin Sagor and directed by Qazi Saleem will be aired on ATN Bangla at 9 pm. It stars Tariq Anam Khan and Saberi Alam among others.

The telefilm, Amra Korbo Joy , starring Tariq Anam Khan, Farhan Ahmed Jovan, Sabila Nur and Irfan Sajjad among others, will be televised on BanglaVision at 8:15 pm. Amra Korbo Joy is written and directed by Prabir Roy Chowdhury.

Shadhinotar Shesh Juddho, a special docu-drama revolving around Bangladesh’s Victory, will be aired on Deepto TV at 11 pm. The docu-drama is directed by Maruf Hasan and edited by Nasimul Hasan.

The telefilm, Meghna-71 , starring Bonna Mirza, Shams Ud Doha, Sadia Yusum Brita, Kiana, Shahid Bahadur, Enahum Hasan Akash and Moumita Mehezabin Orpa among others, will be televised on Duronto Television at 3 pm. Written and directed by Shameem Akter, the telefilm revolves around Meghna, who was a young girl during the Liberation War in 1971.  On the other hand, noted actor and freedom fighter Raisul Islam Asad will share his stories of the Liberation War with children on Duronto Television’s Bijoyer Golpo . On the show, the actor and the children will pay a visit to the National Martyrs Memorial. Directed by Mehedi Hasan Shadhin, Bijoyer Golpo will air on the channel at 9 pm.

The tele-fiction, Chitkaar, starring Nusrat Imrose Tisha and Sharmili Ahmed among others, will be aired on Maasranga Television at 8 pm. Chitkaar is written and directed by Shimanto Shajal.

The tele-fiction, Neel Dongshon , adapted from a story by Syed Shamsul Haq, will be aired on Nagorik TV at 8 pm. Starring Mosharaff Karim, Rawnak Hasan and Robena Reza Jui among others, the tele-fiction is written by Moni Haidar and directed by Hasan Rezaul.
