Birangana faces eviction in Chuadanga as nation celebrates Victory Day
2019-12-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Chuadanga
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/birangana-faces-eviction-chuadanga-nation-celebrates-victory-day-1841368

A young Shukuronnessa picked up arms to liberate the country from Pakistani occupation forces in 1971. But nearly five decades after independence, her struggle to find a permanent home for herself and her family continues.

She has been living in a shack on a government land by the Kumar river in Alamganda since independence. Water Development Board has recently served her a seven-day eviction notice.

Shukuronnessa was only 22 years old when she was brutalised by the Pakistani army for helping freedom fighters but the ordeal did not stop her from fighting for the country.

Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman honoured women abused by the Pakistani army and their collaborators with the title “Birangana” in 1972. A process to rehabilitate them also started at his initiative, but it was stalled after his assassination.

After a High Court order in January 2014, the process to recognise Biranganas as freedom fighters started. For the first time, in October 2015, Bangladesh declared 43 Biranganas as freedom fighters.

Shukuronnessa was among them and has been receiving government benefits.

Monirul Islam, a resident of Alamdanga, said Shukuronnessa’s recognition came after a long struggle. The 70-year-old was living with her 10-member family on the river bank but was recently ordered to vacate the place, he said.

Shukuronnessa is at a loss. “I spent 50 years of my life on the bank of the Kumar river. I have been living here with my four children since my husband’s death,” she said.

“This hut is the only home we have,” she said in a broken voice. “If I’m evicted, I’ll be forced to live on the streets with my family at this age. I’m worried and can’t sleep at night.”

Former commander of Alamdanga Muktijoddha unit, Shafiur Rahman Jowardar, sought the prime minister’s intervention for arranging a permanent home for the Birangana.

Chuadanga Deputy Commissioner Nazrul Islam Sarkar said the government has taken several projects for the homeless which would facilitate thousands of people.

“It’s unfortunate that a woman who endured untold cruelty and fought for our flag is now struggling to find a space she can call home,” he said. “I’ve instructed the upazila nirbahi officer to take necessary steps to resolve the matter,” he added.
