Razakar list published with political motive: Fakhrul
2019-12-17T22:09:07+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/politics/news/razakar-list-published-political-motive-fakhrul-1841584

BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir today alleged that the government has published the “Pakistan prepared list intending to exclude the genuine Razakar”.

“The list has been published with a political motive. They (govt) want to use the Liberation War as a political product to gain political interest,” Fakhrul said while addressing a rally marking the victory day in front of the party’s Nayapaltan central office in Dhaka this noon.

The BNP leader came up with the remarks when the official list of Razakars, which was published on Sunday, has drawn a huge criticism and sparked protest across the country as the names of language movement veterans and freedom fighters were included in the list.

Raising a question of justification in publishing the list of Razakars after 48 years of the country’s independence, Fakhrul said the government also wants to publish a list “excluding the real freedom fighters to meet its political desire”.

Later, a good number of leaders and activists of the party brought out a colourful procession holding placards, festoons, banners national and party flags to celebrate the victory day.

Fakhrul also blasted the ruling party saying that “it is destroying the spirit of the country’s Liberation War and said they (ruling party) cheated people after the war of independence in 1971 by introducing one-party rule in the country”.

Claiming that Awami League has “failed in all sectors”, Fakhrul said the ruling party made the country a “failed state and destroyed its economy”. “There is no space for democracy in the country as they are now controlling mass media,” he added.

“What is going on after 48 years of independence. We fought against Pakistan with a spirit, dream, hope and aspiration but all have been gone smashed by the ruling quarter,” the BNP leader said.

Fakhrul also called upon his party men to be prepared in a bid to wage a tougher movement to free BNP Chairperson Khaleda Zia from jail.

BNP Standing Committee Members Khandaker Mosharraf Hossain, Mirza Abbas, among others, also addressed the rally.
