Victory Day celebrations in Mymensingh
2019-12-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Aminul Islam
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/victory-day-celebrations-mymensingh-1842052

Marking the Victory Day, a week-long festival, held in Mymensingh, concluded recently. The event, organised by Mymensingh district administration and Muktijuddha Sangsad Mymensingh district unit, featured various cultural programmes, where over 50 cultural groups performed.

The celebration began with an inaugural ceremony on December 10, reminiscing the history of Mymensingh’s liberation from the Pak Occupation Army forces in 1971. State minister for Public Administration Farhad Hossain was the chief guest with Md Mizanur Rahman, deputy commissioner of Mymensingh in the chair. A colourful rally, led by freedom fighter and ex-minister for Religious Affairs Principal Motiur Rahman, was also organised prior to the opening ceremony.

The celebrations included discussion meetings on the Liberation War of Bangladesh, cultural performances, art competitions and photo exhibitions. Jatiya Rabindra Sangeet Sammilon Parishad, Mymensingh, Udichi Shilpi Goshthi, Chhayanot Sahitya Sangskritik Academy, Onsumble Theatre, Bahurupi Natya Sangstha, Nrittyadhara, Bidrohi Natya Goshthi, Shilon Abriti Charcha Kendra, Sandipon Sangskritik Sangstha and Mymensingh Nazrul Academy performed at the fiests, among others.

Marking the occasion, different socio-cultural organisations and educational institutions, including Bangladesh Agricultural University (BAU) and Jatiya Kabi Kazi Nazrul Islam University (JKKNIU), hosted day-long programmes. Shilcharya Zainul Abedin Sangrahashala organised an art competition on ‘Liberation War’ for children at its premises where around 76 children participated.

Alokchitra Shilpi Sangsad organised a day-long photography exhibition at the city’s Baishakhi Moncha at Zainul Park. The exhibition was inaugurated by Mayor of Mymensingh City Corporation Ekramul Hoque Titu. Around 220 photographs, mostly on Liberation War, were on display at the exhibition.
