Wait to see if I resign: Mozammel
2019-12-18T19:49:55+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/bangladesh-razakars-list-wait-see-if-i-resign-1842019

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque today asked people to wait and see whether he will resign or not from his post for the grave mistake in the list of Razakars.

“They [those who are demanding resignation] have every right to demand my resignation,” the minister said while talking to The Daily Star over phone regarding errors in the Razakars’ list.

“Let them wait and see whether I will resign or not,” the minister added.

The ministry on Sunday published the names of 10,789 Razakars, who collaborated with the Pakistan occupation army in carrying out mass killings and atrocities against the Bangalees during the 1971 Liberation War.

But the list drew huge criticism as the names of many language movement veterans and freedom fighters were included in the list. The Daily Star has so far found the names of 25 freedom fighters and Liberation War organisers, who were included in the Razakars’ list.

Razakars’ list withheld; revised list Mar 26

Amid criticism, Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque on Monday told reporters that his ministry did not prepare the list. They just published the list as it is provided by the home ministry, he added.

Refusing the Liberation War Affairs minister’s claim, Home Minister Asaduzzaman Khan Kamal today said his ministry did not give any list of Razakars, Al-Badrs and Al-Shams to the Liberation War Affairs Ministry.

Rather the home ministry provided a list of those who are accused under the Collaborators Act, the minister said while briefing media at his office at the secretariat in Dhaka this afternoon.

Left-leaning parties demand removal of minister, secretary

Left Democratic Alliance and Communist Party of Bangladesh in a separate statement today demanded resignation of the Liberation War Affairs minister and secretary.

They also demanded punishment to the officials who were involved in preparing the list.

Besides, Sector Commanders Forum, Liberation War 1971 said they were aggrieved as names of freedom fighter were found in the list of Razakar and other anti-liberation forces.

It also urged the authorities concerned to form a probe commission to identify the people, who prepared the list with false and inconsistent information.

Meanwhile, Bangladesh Hindu Buddhist Christian Unity Council said that they were stunned to see the names of minorities in the Razakars’ list as none from the minorities communities were an anti-liberation force.
