On this day in 1971
2019-12-24T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/day-1971-1844326

DECEMBER 24

Bangladesh Chhatra Sangram Parishad in a press conference, at Shahid Sergeant Zahurul Haque Hall in Dhaka University, declare they will keep fighting until the father of the nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman is freed from the Pakistan army. Leaders of the group say they will surrender weapons only to Bangabandhu, who showed them the ideal path. They promise that Mujib Bahini will help the government to maintain law and order. Bangladesh Chhatra League President Nur-e Alam Siddiqui, other leaders -- Shahjahan Siraj, ASM Abdur Rab, and Abdul Kuddus Makhan -- are present in the press conference.

Fifty four intellectuals in a joint statement demand appropriate investigation of the genocide in Bangladesh. They say those who were related to this brutal event could not be treated under Geneva Convention. Sufia Kamal, Syed Ali Ahsan, Joynul Abedin, Kamrul Hasan, Samar Das, ABM Musa, Kamal Lohani, Faiz Ahmad were among the signees. They demand of forming an international tribunal to bring the culprits -- Al-Badr, Al-Shams, Muslim League, Jamaat-e-Islami, PDP -- under justice.

A report of BBC says that Pakistan President Bhutto has formed a commission led by Justice Hamudur Rahman to probe military failure in Bangladesh and Indo-Pakistan border truce.

More than 100 masterminds of genocide driven by Pakistani military held, a report says. A list of names is published from the police directorate. The arrestees are: Dr Syed Sazzad Hossain, vice-chancellor of Dhaka University, SM Nawab, DIG of police, Fazlul Haq, MNA, Lt Col Golam Ahmad Chowdhury, deputy chief engineer, Maj Afsar Uddin former parliament secretary, Zahurul Haq, deputy director of Razakar, Dr AA Baset, Dhaka Medical College, ABM Nurul Islam, MNA, SB Zaman, MPA, ABM Abdul Khalek Mazumder, Al-Badr leader, Moktar Gunda, commander of Mirpur Mujahid Party, Ashraf Ali, Al-Badr member, Fazlul Quader Chowdhury of Chittagong, Hakim Intajur Rahman Akhunjada, member of central peace committee, Inspector Abdul Halim Sikdar, CIA of Kotwali, SI Kaykobad, former OC of Lalbagh police station, SI Khorshed Kha, former OC of Lalbagh PS, Maolana Bazlur Rahman and Faridabad Madrasa in Dhaka.
