On this day in 1971
2019-12-27T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/day-1971-1845622

DECEMBER 27

RK Karanjia, an investigative journalist and the founder of Indian weekly tabloid Blitz, writes an article on the Liberation War in Bangladesh. In his article he says that Pakistan army should not be treated as war prisoners but as war criminals. According to the Geneva Convention, they could not get the honour. They were cold-blooded killers who bombed an orphanage with an aircraft and two attack helicopters in Dhaka to blame India in front of China and the US. Many children were killed in that incident, which was approved

by many journalists. Pakistan army kill 36 wounded Indian troops in Kamalapur. They hoisted white flag to mark Indian army’s position, Karanjia says.

General Manekshaw meets President Syed Nazrul Islam, Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad and commander-in-chief Col MAG Osmani individually.

Pakistan President Bhutto meets Bangabandhu in Rawalpindi, but the follow-up of the meeting was unknown, a BBC report says.

Provisional President Syed Nazrul Islam says in a meeting at Awami League’s headquarters in Purana Paltan that diplomatic conversation is underway to free Bangabandhu. Pakistan could not keep the president of a free country for long, he says.

More alleged collaborators arrested: Dr Hasan Zaman, former director of Pakistan Academy, Nasiruddin Ahmad Chowdhury, former minister, Maolana Atahar Ali of Kishoreganj town, Maolana Sayedur Rahman of Mymensingh town, Bahauddin Ahmad, former additional SP of Sylhet, Md SB Doza, CO, Dhaka Kotwali, Nurul Amin, superintendant of Tejgaon Telephone Workshop, Shahabuddin, foreman, Dhaka Electric Supply, Maolana Bazlur Rahman of Cumilla’s Doyapur, SM Mujtaba Khurshid, former OC of Lalbagh Police Station, Sub-inspector Yusuf Ali Chowdhury, former OC of Kaliganj Police Station, SI Md Isahaq, former OC of Mohammadpur Police Station, Habildar Nawab Khan, EPCAF, Shami, Mujahid Commander in Mirpur, Md Akil, Mujahid of Mirpur, Md Ali, Mujahid of Mirpur, Abdul Aziz Manna, Mujahid of Mirpur, Shur Mohammad, Mujahid of Mirpur, Shahabuddin, agent of Pakistan army, Abdul Zahir, Razakar, Noakhali, Anka Ohee, Razakar, CHT, Abul Bashar Md Shahjahan, Al-Badr member, Feni, Syed Md Mohen Kader from Mohammadpur, Anisur Rahman, commander of Al-Badr, Bilal Hossain, commander of Al-Badr, SA Siddiqui, commander of Al-Badr, ABM Khalek Majumder, Al-Badr, Omar Hayat of Mirpur, Sirajuddin, member of Peace Committee, Ashraf Ali, member of Al-Badr, Faridabad, SM Munibul Haq, convener of Peace Committee, Syed Ershad Hossain, Tejgaon , Dhaka, Syed Md Mohsin, member of Al-Badr, Mohammadpur and Mohammad Hanif of Mirpur.
