On this day in 1971
2019-12-28T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/day-1971-1846141

DECEMBER 28

Awami League decide to commemorate January 9 as “Sheikh Mujib Day” demanding the immediate release of Bangabandhu, a report from ENA says.

Sheikh Mujib refrained from radio or newspapers during the nine-month long Liberation War, a source from Rawalpindi reports. After he was taken to house arrest, he learned about the war after April 1971.

Eminent author and producer Zahir Raihan, in a press conference, alleges the Al-Badr members were the executors of hundreds of Bengali intellectuals. He found similarity between the genocide in Bangladesh with Indonesia, Jordan and Congo genocides which were conducted under the supervision of US intelligence. He alleges against few Pakistan generals including Niazi for the genocide. He says, “The Al-Badr assassins must have to be brought to daylight before they mingle in the general crowd. This country has lost her best intellectuals in their hands. These animals need to be punished.” A few journalists proposed to build a monument in the killing grounds in Dhaka.

12 countries will shortly recognise Bangladesh, a report of Akashbani says. Another 20 countries are in the queue. Abu Sayed Chowdhury, representative of Bangladesh, successfully receives the response and assistance from Yugoslavia, Russia, Great Britain, Romania, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria and a few others.

More collaborators arrested, a news from APB says: Maolana Nuruzzaman, former chairman of PP, Abdul Wadud, advocate from Siddique Bazar, Firoz Sirazi, a spy from Dhaka, Nayek Subadar Azab Khan, a spy, Intiza Hossain from Mirpur, Sami Ahmad Siddiqui from Sutrapur, Hamid Ali Dewan from Moghbazar, Md Anisur Rahman, member of Al-Badr in Pabna, Md Ezaz Hossain from Mirpur, Mostaq Ahmad from Mirpur and Ezaz Ahmad from Mohammadpur.

A search party is in action to find out the missing intellectuals, a source from Sutrapur Police Station says.
