Mymensingh tasted freedom on this day in '71
2015-12-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Mymensingh
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/mymensingh-tasted-freedom-day-71-184843

On this day in 1971, the freedom fighters of Mymensingh freed the district from the Pakistani occupation forces.

On April 17 in 1971, a fierce battle took place between Pakistani army and the freedom fighters at Kalihati in Tangail on April 17 and it continued for five days. It was the first fierce battle in this region during the 1971 Liberation War.

The Pakistani troops managed to enter Mymensingh town on April 22. The freedom fighters built their stronghold in bordering Haluaghat upazila of the district. Several battles took place in the border area during the nine-month long bloody war.

Between May and November in 1971, the freedom fighters and the Pakistani occupation forces locked in fierce fighting at different places in the district and its surrounding areas. During the battles, both sides witnessed huge casualties.

On December 7, the freedom fighters freed Haluaghat from the occupation forces and on December 8, Phulpur and Bhaluka upazilas were freed, followed by the liberation of Gouripur, Trishal, Iswarganj and Tarakanda areas.

The valiant freedom fighters forced the invaders to retreat from their occupied areas in the district.

On December 10, the freedom fighters led by Principal Motiur Rahman, president of the district unit of Awami League, and Indian allied forces marched towards the town and freed it from the clutches of the occupation forces.

At least 125 freedom fighters, including students and cultural activists, in the district sacrificed their valuable lives for the freedom of the motherland.

To keep the memory of the freedom fighters and martyrs, a Liberation War Memorial titled "Muktijuddha Smiriti Saudha" was built on the bank of the Brahmaputra River in the town in 2000.

Meanwhile, Muktijuddha Sangsad Mymensingh unit and Mymensingh Free and Victory Day Celebration Committee have chalked out different programmes to mark the day.

The programmes include holding colourful rally, discussion and cultural function, said the organisers.
