Razakars' list: MPs slam liberation war affairs minister
2020-01-16T19:47:25+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/razakars-list-in-bangladesh-mp-slams-liberation-war-affairs-minister-1854928

Several MPs today in parliament came down heavily on Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque saying the minister cannot avoid responsibility for publishing the faulty list of Razakers.

“It can’t say directly that the Liberation War Affairs Ministry has no responsibility (for publishing the faulty list of collaborators). It is responsibility of this ministry to verify the authenticity of the list no matter from where it was collected,” ruling Awami League MP Mouazzam Hossain Ratan said.

He made this remark in his supplementary question during question-answer session.

Ratan said the government’s role came under question at present due to inconsistency in some cases regarding the Razakars’ list.

“We, the pro-liberation force, got hurt severely… even the name of real razakars were not included in the list,” he added.

Ratan later questioned whether the list of authentic Razakars would be disclosed before next March 26 Independence Day.

In reply, the minister said they have earlier withdrawn the list expressing regrets as there were flaws in it.

“We’ll publish the list in future after thorough scrutiny and taking cooperation from all quarters to prevent recurrence of errors,” he said.

In reply to a starred question from AL MP Md Faridul Haque Khan, Mozammel said his ministry did not prepare the list of the collaborators rather the Public Security Division of the Home Ministry sent it to his ministry as per the requirement.

“The Liberation War Ministry published the list as it was. Since the Liberation War Affairs Ministry did not prepare the list, the Home Ministry can take action against laxity of anyone if any in this regard,” said Mozammel.

Another senior AL MP Maj (Retd) Rafiqul Islam said the minister will have to take responsibility as he published the list.

He said the minister couldn’t collect the list of authentic collaborators yet.

“I think he will not be able to do it. Because, I have been hearing the same words from him for the last five years,” said Rafiqul Islam.

Gonoforum MP Sultan Muhammed Mansur Ahmed in his supplementary question urged the minister not to divide the country in the Mujib Barsha by publishing the list of collaborators.

In reply, the Liberation War Affairs Minister said he didn’t get any question rather advice from Sultan Muhammed Mansur. “I will consider his advice,” the minister said.
