Tangail was liberated on this day in '71
2015-12-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/tangail-was-liberated-day-71-185530

On this day in 1971, Tangail district was freed from the Pakistani occupation forces.

The same day, the occupation forces also retreated from Hakimpur upazila in Dinajpur after a fierce fight.

The valiant freedom fighters of Tangail hoisted the flag of independent Bangladesh after freeing the district from the Pakistani army on this day during the 1971 Liberation War, reports our correspondent.

On April 3, the occupation forces entered Tangail town after breaking the blockade by the freedom fighters at Goran-Satiachara in Mirzapur.

Within a few days, the Kaderia Bahini, led by the then Chhatra League leader Abdul Kader Siddique, got organised and started fighting with the Pakistani army at different places in Tangail.

Another group of the freedom fighters led by Khandakar Abdul Baten got together and started defending the occupational forces at different places.

On December 10, the Pakistani army lost their confidence as around 2,000 paratroopers of Indian allied forces landed at Poulee near the town. Later, the Pakistani troops started retreating to Dhaka.

The freedom fighters entered the town on December 11 while the general people came down to the streets and started celebrations.

Tangail district administration, Muktijoddha Sangsad and different social and political organisations have arranged various programmes in the district to mark the day.

In Dinajpur, on December 11 in 1971, the Indian allied forces aided by the freedom fighters forced Pakistan troops to retreat following fierce fighting for days in Hilli under Hakimpur upazila of the district, reports our correspondent.

After the Pakistan army started crackdown on Bangalees on March 26 in 1971, the occupation forces created a strong base at Muhara in Hilli area.

Freedom fighters fought several fierce fights with the Pakistani troops in the area while the barbaric forces with the help of their local collaborators killed many innocent people.

In 2012, a memorial was built at Basudevpur village in honour of the 1971 Liberation War martyrs.

Marking the day, upazila unit of Muktijoddha Sangsad have chalked out different programmes including holding rally, discussion and milad mahfil.
