Earth being stolen from banks of Bhairab river in Mujibnagar
2020-01-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Kushtia
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/earth-being-stolen-banks-bhairab-river-mujibnagar-1859392

With government drives against river encroachers on the wane, soil from the banks of the Bhairab river is being stolen in Meherpur’s Mujibnagar upazila.

A group of influential locals have been stealing the soil from at least eight points along a 13-kilometre stretch of the riverbank in the upazila, violating the Agricultural Land Protection and Land Use Act, 2012.

Locals alleged that the earth is being sold mostly to different brick kilns in the area.

During a recent visit to Mahajanpur village in the upazila, this correspondent also came across unabated theft of soil from the riverbank in different places of the village.

A large number of workers were seen cutting soil from different parts of the river’s bank and loading it up on tractor wagons.

Unable to mention any name, the workers said they were engaged in the work by some earth traders in exchange for payment.

Labourer Mobarak Ali said, “The earth is being sold mostly to brick kilns. Some others also buy it for constructing their houses.”

Without being able to provide the amount of earth they extract daily, the labourers said around 50 to 100 wagons are engaged in the work every day there.

Requesting anonymity, one labourer said owners of as many as six brick kilns in Mahajanpur union of the upazila are the primary buyers of the earth that they extract from the riverbank.

Demand for earth is high around this time as it is the peak season for making bricks at the kilns, he also said.

Worried villagers said the destruction of the banks of the river will eventually cause severe erosion of their land during the monsoon, resulting in substantial damage of their property and crops.

They also said the frequent movement of heavily loaded tractor wagons is causing extensive damage to the village roads that are not suited for such heavy traffic.

Nawab Ali Khan, a resident of Mahajanpur village, said the way the earth traders are destroying the river and roads in the village, it seems that they are above the law.

Land owner Imrul Hossain of the same village said, “They are taking away earth from beside my land. My land will definitely be eroded during the upcoming monsoon.”

Nevertheless, he said he did not dare to raise objections against the soil theft as the offenders are highly influential in the area.

A local brick kiln owner, wishing not to be named, said while buying earth, it never crossed his mind to question where the supplier had got the earth from.

After this correspondent drew the attention of Mujibnagar Upazila Nirbahi Officer Usman Ghani over the soil theft, he said he sent out police to the riverbank for investigation, but the criminals fled the scene before police made any arrest.

He assured that necessary action against the offenders would be taken.
