‘Dr Kamal’s role during Liberation War was mysterious’
2020-02-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/dr-kamals-role-during-liberation-war-was-mysterious-1866376

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Huq yesterday in parliament said the role of Gonoforum President Dr Kamal Hossain was “mysterious” during the country’s Liberation War in 1971, and his family’s role to accept the rise of Bangladesh was questionable.

He made the harsh comments while taking part in the thanksgiving motion on President’s speech.

“His [Dr Kamal’s] role in the Liberation War was mysterious. Nevertheless, we don’t want to speak about this. One of his sons-in-law [David Bargman] ... is conspiring against Bangladesh always. The nation certainly knows about it,” the minister said.

Mozammel also said, “I think they couldn’t accept Bangladesh’s today’s success. I think the family’s role to accept Bangladesh’s rise was questionable. This has become clear today what was their role at that time.”

Criticising a recent remark of Kamal Hosain that the government will be ousted from power as it becomes an autocratic one, Mozammel said many people are saying that Kamal was one of the architects of the Constitution though he was a member of the Constitution enacting committee as law minister.

He said that demanding step down of the government was not unusual in the democratic country but the wards Kamal Hossain used, was not acceptable.

Addressing a recent discussion on Saturday, Kamal urged the people to start street movement to oust the Awami League government from power.

‘It is time to ask them to leave. People would no more allow them as they are trying to establish autocratic rule through corruption and torturing people,’ he said.

The minister yesterday in parliament also demanded to relocate different structures including grave of BNP founder and late president Ziaur Rahman from the Jatiya Sangsad area to bring back its ‘original design.’

‘Within the parliament area, there are some structures, including Zia’s grave; and I would request they be removed from the parliament area,’ he added.
