Ekushe February: An ode to an unforgettable event
2020-02-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Ashif Ahmed Rudro
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/book-review/news/ekushe-february-ode-unforgettable-event-1869310

The book is titled: Ekushe February. The title gives away the theme of the book undoubtedly. What's so special about it? What's special is the fact that this is the first ever compilation in Bangla literature on the events of the language movement of 1952.

Famous poet, journalist and critic Hasan Hafizur Rahman first edited the book in 1953. As a compilation, the book is divided into several parts such as Ekusher Kobita (poems), Ekusher Golpo (story), Ekusher Gaan (song) etc. In total, there are 21 literary pieces in the book, symbolic of the momentous date. Each piece is glorious and touching in their own right.

Prominent writers such as Showkat Osman, Abdul Gaffar Chowdhury, Shamsur Rahman and even Hasan Hafizur Rahman himself have contributed with their powerful strokes of pen in this book.

In addition to the 21 literary pieces, the book starts with a very robust discussion by Ali Ashraf, titled, "Equal recognition for all languages" where he reminded us that the language movement was not only for the Bangla language but also for every other language in the world that are oppressed and all of them deserve equal recognition and respect.

The book ends with a factual writeup by Kabiruddin Ahmed called "Ekusher Etihash" (History of the 21st) which is a very thorough and detailed discussion about the events that transpired from 26th January to 25th February (1952), encompassing the events of the language movement.

One can find day to day discussions of these events in the last pages, rich with facts and history. History that every Bangladeshi citizen should learn in order to realise how much this nation has sacrificed for our beloved Bangla language, how this language movement later inspired us to fight for our freedom and how lucky we are to be a free nation.

The book goes highly recommended for anyone who wishes to look through the literature focusing on the language movement as well as those who wish to know the history and backgrounds of this movement that our national heroes undertook, risking and sacrificing their lives in the process.

Hasan Hafizur Rahman does an amazing job as an editor, putting these emotionally relatable and rich pieces of writings together in one book that is Ekushe February.
