Rifle, Roti, Aurat & Dream of the dawn
2015-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Wasim Bin Habib and Tuhin Shubhra Adhikary
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/news/rifle-roti-aurat-dream-the-dawn-187012

"A new acquaintanceship has begun. The old life came to an end on that night of March 25. Ah, let it be true. New people, new acquaintances and a new dawn. How far away is it? Can't be very far. Only this night! There is nothing to fear. It will be over."

These are the last few lines of "Rifle, Roti, Aurat", the first novel on Liberation War, written by Prof Anwar Pasha. Through his protagonist Shudipta Shaheen, he shared his dream of a new country with a firm conviction that the liberation was now a matter of time.

The country tasted that freedom on December 16, 1971. But Anwar Pasha, who had written the epic piece between April and June in 1971, was not there to see his prophetic dream come true.

A professor of Bangla department at Dhaka University (DU), Anwar Pasha, was picked up from his house two days before the victory and brutally killed.

"In April [1971], my father had predicted that Bangladesh will be independent. And the country became liberated, but at the cost of lives of people like my father," said Rabiul Aftab, a son of Prof Anwar.

Sensing imminent defeat, the Bangalee collaborators, particularly the members of notorious killing squad Al-Badr, executed the Pakistan army's blueprint for elimination of teachers, writers, doctors, lawyers, journalists and other professionals.

This final act of atrocity was carried out to destroy the future of the newly independent country and maim the nation permanently by annihilating its brightest minds.

The youngest among two children, Rabiul, now a mechanical engineer of Bangladesh Biman, shared the memories of those turbulent days of 1971 with The Daily Star at his Anwar Pasha Bhaban residence on DU campus.

With his father's books and old newspaper clippings in hands, he spoke about "Rifle, Roti, Aurat" (Rifle, Bread and Women), narrated how his family managed to escape death during the Black Night of March 25, and how his father helped freedom fighters and was abducted.

Looking back at 1971, Rabiul, who was a little over six years when the war began, sought help from his mother in narrating the events. She usually does not give any interview.

As the Pakistani military junta launched "Operation Searchlight" on the night of March 25, Prof Anwar's family was at Nilkhet teachers' quarter.

Screams and fierce sound of gunshots were all around. They also heard sounds of boots on the roof. The Pakistan army attacked and set fire to the slum near Nilkhet and many slum dwellers took shelter on the rooftop of the four-storey building.

After a while, the army men stormed the house by breaking open the main door. Anwar Pasha, his wife and Rabiul were inside the living room hiding under the cot. The door of the room was locked. Rabiul's elder brother Masarul Aftab and a cousin were in another room, hiding behind sacks of rice.

Entering the house, the army started firing indiscriminately.

"For some unknown reason, they did not enter our room. But they entered the room where my brother and cousin were hiding. They fired bullets on the walls," Rabiul Aftab said. The two were unhurt.

"The night was so horrible that whenever I recall it, I get emotional. We passed all the night fearing death."

His father later told them about the heaps of corpses on the rooftop. They did not come out of their home even on March 26.

When the curfew was withdrawn on March 27, the family moved to a relative's in Rayerbazar. There perhaps, Prof Anwar started writing the novel.

First published in 1973, it was based on the situation in claustrophobic Dhaka on March 25-27. It was his last book. He also wrote several anthologies, novels, short stories.

"Being a sensitive person, he put into words his hatred, grievances, pain, expectations and his convictions in this book," said Rabiul.

"He did realise that he would die if the Pakistani forces got the book. Yet he wrote it. He perhaps felt the necessity of documenting history."

The days were getting turbulent gradually.

Like many other teachers, Prof Anwar rejoined the university following tremendous pressure from the authorities. His family shifted to another quarter on Isha Kha road on DU campus in May. But the family found itself in a new trouble. Many pro-Pakistani teachers often pressurised him to make statement in favour of Pakistan junta.

"But my father never did so," said his son.

Prof Anwar Pasha was blacklisted by Pak rulers long before. While a teacher of Edward College in Pabna, he led a programme marking the birth centenary of Rabindranath Tagore, irking the Pakistani government. Practice of Tagore was labelled by West Pakistanis and non-Bangalees as "anti-Pakistan" and "anti-Islam" activity.

His passport was suspended for six years for this.

"He had a great passion and love for Bangla language, Bangalees and Bangalee nationalism," Rabiul said.

Citing a memorial lecture of Prof Wakil Ahmed, a former teacher of Bangla department of DU, Rabiul said his father got connected with freedom fighters and started helping them through collecting money from colleagues.

One day, the family was tipped off about a Pak army raid on their quarter. Prof Anwar hid the manuscript of "Rifle, Roti, Aurat" in the kitchen cupboard.

Then came December.

It was a chilly morning of December 14 when Prof Anwar Pasha was abducted.

"It was between 9:00am and 9:30am. We, the children, were playing carrom on the veranda. My father, Rashidul uncle [SMA Rashidul Hasan], Neely Apa [Rashidul's daughter Roquaiya Hasina Neely] and others were chatting on the drawing room."

Rashidul Hasan, a teacher of English department of Dhaka University, was their close neighbour. His family used to spend nights in Anwar's house in December.

Rabiul said they suddenly they saw a microbus stop in front of the house and some people get down from it.

Hearing knocks, Rabiul's cousin Delwar Hossain opened up the door to see a group of six to seven people. "Who is Anwar Pasha?" asked one of them in Bangla.

"My father approached and said, 'I am'." Rabiul recalled.

The men then asked for a towel. Getting no towel, they blindfolded Anwar with a shawl he was wearing.

Then the men asked Rashidul Hasan his name. As he told them his name, they checked a list and asked him to go with them.

The men then took the two to the vehicle and shot a blank fire before leaving.

Around half an hour later, one of their distant relatives Nawajesh Ali Khan, a former minister of Pakistan government, came to their house to take his family members who were sheltered there after the joint force bombed the ministers' colony.

He came again to their house around 3:00pm and said Prof Anwar was taken by Al-Badr and kept at Ramna Police Station.

Later they came to know that five other DU teachers and a physician of DU medical centre were abducted from the campus in similar fashion. They were: Giasuddin Ahmed, Faizul Mahi, Abul Khair, Serajul Haque Khan, Santosh Chandra Bhattacharyya and Mohammad Martuza.

According to Banglapedia, around 991 academics, 13 journalists, 49 physicians, 42 lawyers and 16 other intellectuals were murdered during the war.

Anwar Pasha's family started searching for after the victory, but to no avail. Later, with the help of Mafizuddin, a minibus driver, they found his body from the killing field in Mirpur, where the Martyred Intellectuals' Memorial was built after liberation.

"My family could identify my father's body because of the shawl," said Rabiul.

The family's bad times were not over. Rabiul's elder brother Masarul Aftab, a bright student, was arrested by police in 1972 for his suspected involvement in far left Naxalite politics.

Police, however, got nothing to prove against him. He was released following intervention of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The then police chief apologised to his mother.

But Masarul started suffering from hallucination and later psychiatrist diagnosed him with mental illness.

"It was a second blow for us after losing my father," he said, adding that his brother has lost vision of one of his eyes and now is having kidney problem.

Rabiul himself passed difficult times. "There was no one around me to share my pain," he said.
