Sofia Khan: Resolute in her fight against oppression
2020-02-21T00:00:00+06:00 | M R Mahbub
https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/amar-ekushey-2020/news/sofia-khan-resolute-her-fight-against-oppression-1871050

Sofia Khan showed a keenness in politics and patriotism from a very early age. She was initiated into politics by the revolutionary Santosh Chatterjee. At age nine, she became involved with the women's movement. She was involved in leftist movements as a member of the Chhatra Federation during her years in college. Thus, it was only natural that in 1952 when students started a movement to protect their mother tongue and hence their cultural identity, Sofia, then a teacher of a public school, readily participated, risking arrest and losing her job.

Sofia Khan was born in June 16, 1928 in Digholkandi village of Ghatail thana in Tangail to parents Advocate Abdul Karim and Hamida Khanam. Sofia Khan completed her matriculation exams from Tangail's Bindubasini High School in 1942, finished her Intermediate in Arts (IA) and Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree from Kolkata's Lady Brabourne College. In 1948, she enrolled herself in Dhaka University for her Master's. In 1953, Sofia applied for a teaching position in public school for girls in Sylhet, before joining the Mymensingh Bidyamoi School. There, she lost her job because of her involvement in the Language Movement. Later in 1954, she joined the Mymensingh Muslim Girl's School as a teacher, where she served for 37 years.

During the ongoing strikes of March 11, 1948, Sofia protested in front of the strike enforcing committee. She shares, "Nadira and I went from school to school, collecting girls to form groups. After 1950, we found Halima Khatun, Nurunnaher as well as Rowshon Ara Bacchu. Nadira was jailed frequently. Hence, Rokeya and I had to take leadership of the girls."

In 1952, Sofia Khan actively participated in the movement and also participated in the meeting-rally organised by the Sharbodolio Sangram Parishad. She also organised girls from schools and colleges and carried out protests. Sofia Khan was part of a protest and student assembly on February 4, 1952 in front of Dhaka University.

After the massacre of February 21, she started collecting donations for a fund to treat those who had been injured during the movement and for the construction of the Shaheed Minar. In her words, "Many mothers and sisters came forward and helped us out of sheer emotion. Aside from money, many had also donated their jewellery to us."

While teaching at Mymensingh Bidyamoi School in 1953, the headmistress had gathered evidence against her prior to the movement and terminated her from the job. In this regard, she recalls, "At the time, the Dhaka University Language Movement carried out by students was under much scrutiny from the authorities. One day, Nadira and I went to fetch the students from Muslim Girl's High School. The head teachers closed the main gate and informed the police. Upon learning this, we climbed over the school walls and sought refuge at the house next door."

"After this, we were always on the run. When I first joined Mymensingh Bidyamoi School, the head mistress there recognised me instantly. Later she called to inform me that I would have to go through police verification. Eventually one day, the police came over and asked if I was involved with the Language Movement. And I said yes. I lost my job after a few days."

Sofia Khan—the brave woman who fought for her mother tongue, passed away on February 14, 2008.

Excerpted from MR Mahbub's Jara Amar Bhasha Shongrame (2012).

Translated from Bangla by Rubab Nayeem Khan. Modified slightly from the original for clarity.
