TV specials on International Mother Language Day
2020-02-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/tv-specials-international-mother-language-day-1871023

As the world celebrates linguistic and cultural diversity on International Mother Language Day, The Daily Star has compiled a list of television programmes set to be aired in the country today.

Telefilm Bangla, directed by Taslima Mukta, will be aired on Maasranga Television at 10: 30 pm. It stars renowned actors Abul Hayat and Nusrat Imrose Tisha, among others.

The Language Movement laid the foundation of nationalism and paved the way for the birth of Bangladesh. Women actively participated in the movement, at a time when the society was largely conservative. Deepto TV's documentary, Bhashajoyita, shines a light on the lives of activists Rawshan Ara Bachchu, Halima Khatun, Sufia Ahmed, Sofia Khan, Rani Bhattacharya and Pratibha Mutsuddi. Directed by Shabnam Ferdousi, it will be aired on the channel at 10 am.

Bhul Golpo, directed by Tuhin Hossain and starring Afran Nisho and Mehazabein, among others, will be aired on BanglaVision at 9:05 pm. Ekusher Jonno , a poetry recital show, will be aired at 6:05 pm on the channel as well. Shimul Mustapha, Ahkam Ullah, Sharmin Lucky, Naznin Naaz, Mehedi Hasan and other artistes will recite heartfelt poems on the show.

On Duronto Television's Ekusher Golpo, prominent journalist and Language Movement veteran Kamal Lohani will be answering queries about the martyrs of the Language Movement. Helmed by Monirul Hossain Shipon, the show is based on a group of children in a village who have built a Shaheed Minar out of clay. Featuring child actors Joyeth Kolyan, Rizia Sultana Rafia, Mehraz Rahman Swapnil, Arika Hossain Labonno, Sudipto Sharan Sikder and Tasrin Munni, Ekusher Golpo will be aired on the channel at 5 pm. Furthermore, an International Mother Language Day special episode of Sisimpur w ill be aired on Duronto Television at 5:30 pm.

This episode of the popular children's show will focus on the significance of the Shaheed Minar, literature, music, usage of libraries as well as nutrition and wellness among other topics. Another Monirul Hossain Shipon directorial, Jhutum Pakhir Kotha, about a girl who has a pet parrot, will be aired on the channel at 8 pm. It stars Syed Hasan Imam, Sabiha Zaman, Jitu Ahsan, Sushama Sarker and Mugdhota Morshed Riddhi.

The telefilm , Laal Ronger Golpo, starring Tauquir Ahmed and Bipasha Hayat, will be aired on NTV at 11:30 pm. It is helmed by Mahmud Didar.

The telefilm, Raat Jaga Niye , written and directed by Shahiduzzaman Selim, will be televised on Channel i at 7:50 pm. Shahiduzzaman Selim also stars in the telefilm, alongside Ashna Habib Bhabna and other prominent actors.
