Delhi riots ‘state-sponsored genocide’: Mamata Banerjee
2020-03-02T20:51:26+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/international/news/delhi-riots-state-sponsored-genocide-mamata-banerjee-1875358

In a hard-hitting remark, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee today alleged the violence in Delhi was "state-sponsored genocide".

"I am deeply pained by the killing of innocent people in Delhi. I think it was genocide… the violence in Delhi was state-sponsored," Mamata said while addressing a TMC event in Kolkata, reports The Statesman.

Mamata claimed it was due to the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) that "so many people were killed" in the Delhi violence. "Amit Shah should keep this in mind".

She said the BJP should apologise for the Delhi violence, the Indian English daily reports.

"The BJP is trying to replicate the Gujarat model of riots across India, including in West Bengal," the chief minister added.

Indian SC to hear plea on FIR against BJP leaders for hate speech

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court of India will hear petitions of Delhi violence victims, seeking FIR against BJP leaders for alleged "hate speeches", on Wednesday.

A bench headed by Chief Justice SA Bobde today agreed to hear the plea filed by victims, The Statesman reports.

At least 46 people have been killed so far as two more bodies were recovered days after violent clashes erupted between the supporters and opponents of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) last week.

Over 200 people have been injured as demonstrators rampaged through parts of the northeast district of the national capital, burning down shops and houses and attacking the residents.

Last Thursday, the Delhi High Court had given the Centre four weeks to file its response on the issue of filing FIRs against three BJP leaders -- Kapil Mishra, Pravesh Verma and Anurag Thakur -- for alleged hate speeches and inciting violence in the national capital.

The violence started a day after BJP leader Kapil Mishra carried out a rally in Jaffrabad area on February 22 and gave a three-day ultimatum to the anti-CAA protesters to clear the area.

"Three days' ultimatum for Delhi Police – clear the roads in Jaffrabad and Chand Bagh. After this, we won't listen to you," he declared.
