Historic 7th March
2020-03-07T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/editorial/news/historic-7th-march-1877395

For Bangladesh, several days are embossed in gold in its history. March 7 of 1971 is one of them, for it turned the course of history for the nation and the subcontinent as a whole. The day, 49 years ago, stands out for two main reasons—the oratorial brilliance of Bangabandhu demonstrated in the 23 minutes of extempore delivery tempered by logic, reason and sobriety, and delivered without a pause or hesitation. It stands out also for the substance as well as the soul of the words that Bangabandhu uttered in the impassioned speech to the Bengalis in 1971, which will rate among the best speeches by any world leader in the annals of world history. It was also the day that the nation, under Bangabandhu's direction, started its final preparation for the concluding stages of the liberation of the people and the formation of an independent nation, with a Flag and a Country of its own. It laid out clear guidance for the Bengalis as to how to conduct themselves during the interregnum and issued a warning to the Pakistani military junta to shun the path of violence and force.

The speech, which has been included in UNESCO'S Memory of the World Register as a "documentary heritage", encapsulates brilliantly the struggle of the Bengalis for their political rights. For the Bengalis, post-1947 was the continuation of the yoke of deprivation and repression under British rule, despite being the majority. It was an authentic testimony of the failure of multicultural and multiethnic societies to coagulate as a nation under misrule, motivated by prejudice and a politically bigoted polity that was unwilling to feel the pulse and the sentiments of the majority of the people and concede to the majority will.

The speech was also effectively a declaration of the independence of Bangladesh, if not a direct call to arms. For the final words of the memorable speech, "The struggle this time is for emancipation; the struggle this time is for independence", carries no other meaning. And those are the words that launched the people into the final phase of the independence struggle of the Bengalis, our glorious Liberation War, from March 26, 1971.
