Nation rejoices Liberation war victory
2015-12-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/nation-rejoices-liberation-war-victory-188476

The entire nation celebrated the country's Victory Day yesterday.

Several thousand ruling Awami League leaders, activists and supporters as well as common people brought out a colourful procession with a vow to punish all war criminals under trial and build a secular and democratic Bangladesh.

BNP also brought out a procession, the first in four years on Victory Day, from its Nayapaltan office.

The ruling Awami League activists gathered at the Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh in the capital around 2:00pm. They later marched towards Bangabandhu Museum at Dhanmondi-32.

Before the procession, a rally chaired by Dhaka City unit AL acting president MA Aziz was held.

AL leaders Matia Chowdhury, Mahbubul Alam Hanif, Mofazzal Hossain Chowdhury Maya, Ahmod Hossain, and Khalid Mahmud Chowdhury, among others, addressed the rally.

Jubo League, Mahila League, Jubo Mahila League, Sramik League, Swechchhasebak League and other front and like-minded organisations participated in the rally.

Different socio-cultural and educational institutions and organisations paid tributes to the martyrs who sacrificed their lives to liberate the country from the Pakistani occupation force in 1971.

At the Suhrawardy Udyan, thousands of people sang the national anthem on the occasion, reports our DU correspondent.

Elaborate programmes, including, rallies, processions, concerts, photo exhibitions, discussions and cultural events were also held at Dhaka University.

Bijoy 2015 Udjapan Jatiya Committee, Sector Commanders' Forum, Muktijuddher Chetona Bastabayan Committee and Gonojagoron Mancha jointly organised the Victory Day celebrations this year at the university.

Volunteer organisation "Dream Bangladesh" brought out a procession on the campus and was joined by hundreds of students and youths.

Dhaka University Journalists' Association organised a three-day photo exhibition titled "Road to Independence 1971".

Sammilito Sangskritik Jote brought out a colourful procession from Central Shaheed Minar.

Teachers, students and employees of DU led by Vice Chancellor AAMS Arefin Siddique placed wreaths at National Martyrs' Memorial in Savar. Teachers, students and employees of North South University and officials and employees of Bangladesh House Building Finance Corporation and Janata Bank Limited also paid tributes to martyrs.

Several thousand BNP men gathered before their office and marched towards Malibagh. The party last brought out a rally on Victory Day in 2011, Shamimur Rahman, an assistant office secretary of BNP told The Daily Star.

BNP leaders claimed they could not organise programmes on Victory Day in the last four years as the government "did not permit them to do so".

Yesterday, BNP leader Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir took part in the procession on a truck. No other senior leaders or standing committee members of the party were seen.

In Chittagong, thousands of people gathered at the Central Shaheed Minar there to pay their respects to martyrs. Different universities organised elaborate programmes to celebrate the day.

VICTORY DAY CELEBRATED IN INDIA

Bangladeshi freedom fighters and Indian war veterans and serving officers of the Armed Forces yesterday commemorated their victory over Pakistani troops in 1971.

Bangladesh Food Minister Md Qamrul Islam, along with other serving and retired officers of the 30-member Bangladeshi delegation who were present, placed a wreath at War Memorial in Fort William.

Victory Day celebrations at Eastern Command assume a special significance as freedom fighters and Indian war veterans who fought shoulder to shoulder reunite every year in Kolkata to celebrate the momentous occasion in history.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi saluted the courage and indomitable spirit of Indian Armed Forces on Victory Day.
