Liberation War films
2020-03-30T18:10:13+06:00 | Shah Alam Shazu
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/liberation-war-films-1887718

Some films tell us timeless tales. The films about our glorious liberation war are the ones that give us courage and strength as a nation. These films teach generations about our nation's birth, our struggles and our indomitable spirit. There are several films on liberation war and in this glorious month of independence, here are some of the notable ones to watch.

The first film made on the Liberation War was Ora Egaro Jon , directed by Chashi Nazrul Islam. The film featured a star-studded cast of Razzak, Shabana, Syed Hasan Imam and freedom fighter Khasru, among other stars and freedom fighters.  Another acclaimed film by the director is Sangram , based on the diary of Sector Commander Khaled Mosharraf.

Hangor Nodi Grenade is a 1997 classic by Islam, based on the novel of the same name by Selina Hossain. The film featured Sohel Rana, Suchorita and Aruna Biswas in lead roles.

Directed by legendary Khan Ataur Rahman, Abar Tora Manush Ho was a widely appreciated and acclaimed film on the Liberation War. It featured Farooque, Babita, Rosy Afsary, Raisul Islam Asad and Rawshan Jamil, among other stars.

Orunodoyer Ognishakkhi tells the tale of a Birangona (war heroine) and captures the true essence of the resistance against the Pakistan army by our people. Directed by Subhash Datta, the film was released in 1972.

After independence, several filmmakers and directors initiated such film projects to inspire the people of the war-torn country to build new lives.

Released in 1973, Dhire Bohe Meghna , directed by Alamgir Kabir was another successful hit. Revolving around the story of an Indian woman, the film shows the real brutality of the war. Golam Mustafa, Bulbul Ahmed, Khalil and Bobita among others appeared in this film.

Acclaimed director Narayan Ghosh Mita directed several hit films in his career. Alor Michil featured Razzak, Farooque, Anwar Hossain, Babita, Sujata and Rosy, among others. The film is said to be one of the most successful films by director Narayan.

Megher Onek Rong is the first color film made on the Liberation war in the country. Directed by Harunur Rashid, this film featured Rowshan Ara, Omar Elahi and Adnan,p among others.

Amra Tomader Bhulbo Na , another film directed by Harunur Rashid was a success, back in the nineties.

Nasiruddin Yousuff directed Ekattorer Jishu in 1993, featuring Pijush Bandyopadhyay, Humayun Faridi, Shahiduzzaman Selim among others. Nasiruddin made another film about liberation war based on Nishiddo Loban , a novel by Syed Shamsul Haque. Guerilla was widely appreciated for stellar performances from Jaya Ahsan, Ferdous, Shatabdi Wadud and many others.

Aguner Poroshmoni was the directorial debut of the legendary writer, Humayun Ahmed. Based on his novel of the same name, the film tells the story of a family, struggling to survive the war. Asaduzzaman Noor, Bipasha Hayat and Abul Hayat among others played in the lead roles in this film.

Later in 2004, Humayun Ahmed also made Shyamol Chhaya , focusing on a group's journey by boat during the tumultuous period of the war.

Directed by Morshedul Islam, Amar Bondhu Rashed and Anil Bagchir Ekdin are two films made on the liberation war. Amar Bondhu Rashed , based on a novel by Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, featured Dr Enamul Haque, Raisul Islam Asad and Pijush Bandyopadhyay among others.

Anil Bagchir Ekdin , based on Humayun Ahmed's novel featured, Gazi Rakayet, Jyotika Jyoti and Farhana Mithu among others.

Khelaghor , is another liberation war based film by Morshedul Islam.

Directed by Tanvir Mokammel, Nodir Naam Madhumati , features Ali Zaker, Raisul Islam Asad, Sara Zaker, Tauquir Ahmed and Afsana Mimi among others in the lead roles.

Jibon Dhuli , another film on the liberation war by Tanvir Mokammel, featured Shatabdi Wadud and Jyotika Jyoti in lead roles.

Tauquir Ahmed's directorial debut Joyjatra is a critically acclaimed film on the liberation war. Humayun Faridi, Tariq Anam Khan, Nazma Anowar, Mahfuz Ahmed, Bipasha Hayat, Azizul Hakim, Rumana, Shahed and Chadni among others were featured in the film.

Besides cinema, several documentary films on the liberation war have been made over the years.
