Liberation War on silver screens
2015-12-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Saurav Dey
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/liberation-war-silver-screens-189283

The history and glory of a nation is broadly reflected on its films. The Liberation War of 1971 reshaped, or at least greatly influenced, the film industry of Bangladesh. The history of a land struggling to become a nation came alive on celluloid many times.

Many feature films have been made on the war and many more will be made, but there are certain films that are etched in the hearts of people.

Films like “Ora Egaro Jon”, “Orunodoyer Agnishakkhi”, “Abar Tora Manush Ho”, “Ekattorer Jishu”, “Guerilla”, “Aguner Poroshmoni” “Songram”, “Hamgor Nodi Grenade” are classics.

Chashi Nazrul Islam's “Ora Egaro Jon” is the first of its kind when it comes to feature films on the war. The film casts real freedom fighters. “Songram” another film by Chashi Nazrul Islam is recounts the tales written in the diary of a sector commander.

There is also Narayan Ghosh Mita's groundbreaking film “Alor Michhile” which celebrates the power of youths who ushered in a new era in Bangladesh.

Khan Ataur Rahman's “Abar Tora Manush Ho” is another masterpiece based on similar theme.

Zahir Raihan's “Jibon Theke Neya” vividly portrays the struggles of Bangladesh and the mass uprising of 1969. Though it is set prior to the Liberation War, the film foreshadows en imminent war which gave birth to an independent Bangladesh.

During the '70s some of the notable films were made by directors like Subhash Dutta, Alamgir Kabir, Khan Ataur Rahman, Narayan Ghosh Mita, Momtaj Ali and Chashi Nazrul Islam.

Again, great films on the war hit screens during the '90s. Films like Nasirudin Yousuff's “Ekattorer Jishu”, Humayun Ahmed's “Aguner Poroshmoni”, Tanvir Mokammel's “Nodir Nam Modhumoti” and Khan Ataur Rahman's “Ekhono Onek Raat” are high in spirits.

Aside from mainstream films, the war of independence is beautifully depicted in short films. Morshedul Islam's “Agami” and “Suchona”, Enayet Karim's “Potaka”, Abu Sayeed's “Protyaborton” and “Dhushor Jatra”, and Tareque Masud and Catherine Masud's “Muktir Gaan” and “Muktir Kotha” are unmatched.

That is not that end. Many great films are being made encircling the War of Liberation. Films like “Guerilla”, “Joyjatra”, Ekattor”, “Shyamol Chhaya” “Amar Bondhu Rashed”, “Anil Bagchir Ekdin” and “Meghmollar” are bringing forth the sacrifices made by our heroes.
