Zia's declaration
2014-04-07T00:00:10+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/zias-declaration-19001

Re: Syed Badrul Ahsan's news analysis, “History, as the Zias see it”, The Daily Star, Saturday 29th March, 2014. In referring to the second declaration of independence by Ziaur Rahman, Mr Ahsan is unfortunately, incorrect in stating that “Zia quickly grasped the truth. Within minutes, he wrote out another statement...” This statement, which he refers to, was in fact drafted by Mr AK Khan. Sensing that the first statement by Ziaur Rahman would be construed as a coup, Mr AK Khan drafted the second statement which was later read out by Ziaur Rahman, on behalf of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on 28th March 1971; as documented in Volume 15 of Govt of Bangladesh Document: “Liberation War Documents”, page no. 129 (reprinted in 2010). I was an eyewitness to this process, as I, along with late M A Hannan (Chittagong District Awami League Party Secretary General) and Mr Mosharraf Hossain (the then MPA), currently Minister of Housing and Public Works, went to see Mr. A. K. Khan in Fatikchari, Chittagong. There Mr. A. K. Khan handed us the draft. We then proceeded to the Kalurghat Transmitter Centre, and gave the draft to Ziaur Rahman, which he read out on behalf of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on the morning of 28th March 1971. For the sake of historical accuracy, the proper corrections should be made. Mirza Aboo Mansur Former MPA, Fatikchari Awami League, Chittagong Zonal Commander, Sector - 1, in War of Liberation

***** SBA's response Syed Badrul Ahsan thanks the writer of the above letter for his response to the article in question. Meanwhile, note may also be taken of some points in relation to Major Ziaur Rahman's statements on 27 March 1971.

A.R. Mallick's words Dr. A.R. Mallick, at the time vice chancellor of Chittagong University, states in his memoirs, Amar Jibonkotha O Bangladesher Mukti  Sangram (Agamee Prakashani December 1995, Second Edition September 2007) on page 66: 'On 27 March Ziaur Rahman declared independence in his own name. I remember he said, “I, Major Zia, do hereby declare . . .”, et cetera. Right then I voiced my objection. I told Hannan to send news to Kalurghat that the words of the declaration should be changed. I suggested that in the interest of the country the declaration had to be recast. Zia could declare independence on behalf of Bangabandhu Mujib. That would bring international support for us. No one in the outside world knew Zia. Support from outside the country would not be forthcoming if people heard that Major Zia had made the announcement. Thus it was that Major Zia rephrased his declaration. It is my feeling that on my advice M.R. Siddiqui and Hannan may have got in touch with Major Zia and had the declaration changed.'

Belal Mohammad's comment In his work, Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra (Anupam Prokashani, Fourth Edition February 2003), Belal Mohammad notes on pages 40-41: 'I handed him a single sheet of paper. He took out a pen from his pocket. Initially he wrote, “I, Major Zia, do hereby declare independence of Bangladesh.” I then told him, “Would you like to say something like 'on behalf of Bangabandhu'? He replied, “You are right.” Drawing an arrow after his name, he wrote: “On behalf of our great national leader Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. . .” . . . The declaration was written mainly after consultations with me and in the presence of Captain Oli Ahmed. I was assisted by Professor Momtaz Uddin Ahmed in the translation of the announcement into Bangla.'

Mahfuzur Rahman's  view In the compilation 1971: 25-30 March Biplobi Betar Kendra Shonglishto Tothyaboli (Samaj Anushilon, Chittagong, March 2005, the following quote from Dr. Mahfuzur Rahman's Bangalir Jatiyotabadi Sangram Muktijuddhe Chotogram has been reproduced on page 155: 'At one stage of the broadcast, his announcement of himself being acting head of state could have had one reason, which was that he mistook a people's war for a rebellion. That a people's war and a rebellion are not the same was something he realized after he had made the broadcast and come under pressure, the result being an amended statement on his part. . . After his (original) announcement, Major Zia was requested by Dr. A.R. Mallick, A.K. Khan, Professor Mohammad Khaled, indeed everyone, to change his declaration.'
