“Six-point demand was the roadmap to independence”
2020-06-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/six-point-demand-was-the-roadmap-independence-1910213

June 7, 1972

BANGABANDHU'S JUNE 7 SPEECH

The nation observes the historic June 7 throughout the country with due solemnity. The grateful nation pays rich tribute to Manu Mia, Mujibullah, Abul Hussain and countless others who laid down their lives on June 7, 1966 for achieving the right to self-determination of the nation and paved the way for the liberation of Bangladesh.

On this historic occasion, Bangabandhu today speaks to a mammoth gathering at the Suhrawardy Udyan. Recounting the history of Six-point Movement, the prime minister says that although Ayub Khan's regime took recourse to all sorts of brutal measures against the proponents, organisers and supporters of the six-point formula, they couldn't suppress it as the demands garnered massive public support. It was the beginning of the struggle for independence, he adds. Recalling the heroic sacrifices of the June 7 martyrs, he urges the people to take a fresh vow to rebuild the nation.

Bangabandhu recalls with gratitude the assistance and cooperation extended to the struggling people of Bangladesh for their liberation by the people and government of India and Russia. He expresses his confidence that the friendship and brotherly ties with these two friends will be everlasting and no power on earth can drive a wedge between them.

Sharply rebuking Pakistan President ZA Bhutto for indulging in purposeless talk, Bangbandhu turns down the offer to sit and talk for a settlement. Let Bhutto recognise Bangladesh first and then it will be decided what to do and what not to do, he adds. Bangabandhu advises Bhutto not to waste his efforts to save war criminals. They will be tried for the brutality they committed in Bangladesh during the war, says the prime minister. He also asks Bhutto to allow four lakhs of Bangalees living in Pakistan to return to Bangladesh.

Bangabandhu further says that Bangladesh needs help from friendly countries but such assistance must be without any strings attached. The government cannot accept any aid belittling the country's independence, he adds.

Bangabandhu appeals to the people to put extra effort to increase production in agricultural and industrial units. He adds that the government has started the task of reconstruction on debris and will not be able to deliver any substantial goods to the people for three years.

The prime minister warns hoarders, smugglers and conspirators of stern action if they don't desist from their evil-mongering immediately.

SOURCES: June 8, 1972 issue of Purbodesh.
