6-Point emerged as demand of freedom: PM
2020-06-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/6-point-emerged-demand-freedom-pm-1910757

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday said the historic Six-point Demand had emerged before the people of this part of Bengal as their demand for freedom since they had taken it as their right to live.

"The people had taken the Six-Point Demand in such a way that I don't know whether such a demand could draw so much popularity so rapidly in any country of the world. The people of Bangla had taken it as their rights to live. And it was actually that demand," she said while chairing a virtual online discussion marking the historic Six-Point Day.

The National Implementation Committee for the Celebration of the Birth Centenary of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman organised the discussion as well as an online quiz completion with participation of the young generation.

Hasina said the people of the country not only extended support to the Six-Point Demand, they also accepted the demand of autonomy as their own.

Focusing on the context of the Six-Point Demand, Hasina said Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had placed the demand for establishing the rights of the Bangalee nation.

"It was seen the people of East Bengal meaning East Pakistan was completely unprotected during the 1965 Pakistan-India war," she said, adding that the then Pakistani rulers did not take any step to save the East Bengal.

The PM said the Pakistani rulers arrested numerous leaders and activists of the Awami League and the general people during the six-point movement.

The Father of the Nation in his "Karagarer Rojnamcha" (Jail Diary) clearly wrote how the Pakistanis unleashed torture and repression at that time, she said. But the people of Bangladesh were marching forward along the path of movements and struggles.

"With continuation of the tortures and oppressions to suppress the movement, the people of Bangla became more conscious, more organised and more united. Of course, there was exception for some collaborators. Some collaborators are always there, which is a problem," she said.

Bangabandhu on January 18, 1968, was taken to Dhaka Cantonment from Dhaka Central Jail after his arrest and a case -- which became famous as Agartala conspiracy case -- was framed by the Pakistani rulers against Bangabandhu and 34 other civil and military officers and persons.

Bangabandhu was made the number-1 accused in the case, said Hasina, the eldest daughter of Bangabandhu.

In this case, the main charge was that Bangabandhu tried to secede East Bengal from Pakistan through an armed revolution, she mentioned.

But the people of Bangladesh burst into protest against the case. Chhattra Sangram Parishad waged movements in a united way and mass upsurge took place, she said.

Ayub Khan was compelled to withdraw the case in the face of mass movement on February 21, 1969. And Bangabandhu was released from jail on February 22, 1969, she added.

The PM said the 1970 general election was held in the backdrop of the six-point movement and Bangladesh Awami League won the election and got majority seats in entire Pakistan.

"June 7, the day the historic Six-Point Demand was placed in 1966, is very important for us as we got the independence for the Six-Point Day," she said.

Bangabandhu raised the issues of disparity and deprivation again and again, Hasina said. "Bangabandhu struggled against the deprivation and we got the independence marching along the way of his struggles."

Noted writer Prof Syed Manzoorul Islam was present as the chief discussant at the event, while Agriculture Minister Abdur Razzaque and Education Minister Dr Dipu Moni also took part in the discussion.
