Six-point demand blossomed as Bangalees’ demand for freedom: PM
2020-06-07T21:16:34+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/six-point-demand-blossomed-bangalees-demand-freedom-1910545

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today said the historic six-point demand declared by Bangabandhu blossomed as Bangalees' demand for freedom at that time.

"People had taken the six-point demand in such a way…I don't know whether such a demand enjoyed such popularity and at such speed in any country," she said.

The prime minister said this while presiding over a pre-recorded discussion marking the historic 'Six-Point Day'.

She joined the discussion titled "Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Six-point Demand: Charter for Freedom of Bangalees" from her official Gono Bhaban residence.

Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Birth Centenary Celebration National Implementation Committee organised the discussion as well as a quiz competition on the occasion.

Sheikh Hasina said the people of the country not only extended support to the six-point demand, they also accepted the demand of autonomy as their own.

Highlighting the background of the six-point demand, the prime minister said Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had placed the demand for establishing the rights of the Bangalees.

"There was a background of the six-point demand. It was seen during the 1965 Pakistan-India war that the people of East Pakistan were completely unprotected," she said.

Sheikh Hasina mentioned that the then Pakistani rulers did not take any step to save Purba Banga [then East Pakistan] which was their province. "After remaining unprotected at that time, it seemed we lived on the kindness of India," she said.

Noted writer Professor Syed Manzoorul Islam was present as the chief discussant at the event, while Agriculture Minister Dr Abdur Razzak and Education Minister Dr Dipu Moni also took part in the discussion from Bangladesh Television studio.

Chief Coordinator of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Birth Centenary Celebration National Implementation Committee Dr Kamal Abdul Naser Chowdhury moderated the event on the occasion.

The discussion was aired on digital platforms including on television, radio and social media due to the current global situation for coronavirus, organisers said.
