Foundation for freedom fighters maimed in Liberation War
2020-07-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/foundation-freedom-fighters-maimed-liberation-war-1924829

July 4, 1972

BANGABANDHU VISITS CUMILLA

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman today stresses the need to build good character with a view to establishing a new society in the free and sovereign land of Bangladesh. He urges the people to ensure that future generations are capable of providing an honest leadership and prepare themselves as ideal citizens of Bangladesh.

Addressing the biggest ever public meeting in Cumilla, the prime minister laments that while the bloodstains of the martyrs are still there, a section of people has gotten busy with fortune hunting. He lists among others the black marketers, hoarders and smugglers in this category. He urges the people to resist these criminal elements unitedly.

The prime minister announces that the government will soon set up a foundation for the welfare of freedom fighters whose injuries during the Liberation War rendered them physically disabled. The proposed foundation will be entrusted with the task of rehabilitating the maimed freedom fighters in the society with due dignity. He adds that a similar organisation has already been working to rehabilitate dishonoured women.

Bangabandhu reiterates his stand that war criminals responsible for genocide, rape and destruction will be tried on Bangladesh soil. There is no power on earth that can stop Bangladesh from trying the worst criminals in human history, he adds.

The prime minister later makes a surprise visit to the Bangladesh-India border near Tripura to see the workings of Bangladesh Rifles. He calls upon local people to form public committees and assist the border force to stop smuggling in the border areas.

DETAINED BENGALEES SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO RETURN HOME

In a meeting with US President Richard Nixon's special envoy John B Connally, Bangladesh President Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury says today that fundamental human rights demand that the Bangalees now detained in Pakistan should be allowed to return to Bangladesh, and similarly the non-Bangalees who want to go back to Pakistan and against whom there are no specific charges may go to Pakistan. Connally assures the president that he would exercise his influence to resolve this issue during his meeting with Pakistan President ZA Bhutto.

SOURCES: July 5, 1972 issues of Bangladesh Observer, Dainik Bangla and Dainik Ittefaq.
