Azhar, Pak army abducted college teacher in '71
2014-04-09T00:00:33+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/azhar-pak-army-abducted-college-teacher-in-71-19359

A prosecution witness yesterday said she saw war crimes accused ATM Azharul Islam with the Pakistani army while they were picking up her brother Chitta Ranjan Roy, Professor of Rangpur Carmichael College, in a car on the night of April 30, 1971. Professor Kalachand Babu and his wife Monjushree, Professor Sunil Chandra Baran and Professor Ram Krishna Adhikary of the same college were also picked up that night, said ninth prosecution witness Shova Kar at the International Crimes Tribunal-1. All of them were later killed. “My brother and other teachers were intellectuals and had been killed in a planned way. I want justice," she said. Shova, 62, was a student of class XII of Carmichael College in 1971 and Azharul was her classmate. The witness said she used to live with her brother Chitta, a professor of mathematics, on the college campus. Around 11:00pm of the fateful night, the Pak army came to their house, she told the tribunal. “The Pakistani army

blindfolded my brother and tied his hands behind his back. A Pakistani army snatched away my earrings. Then they took my brother away in a military car.” Through the window, Shova saw some Bengali civilians with the Pak army. “Among the Bengalis, I saw Islami Chhatra Sangathan leader Azharul. He used to study with us," she said. With the help of Ratan Das, cook of the college guest house, she then contacted his brother's student Salahuddin, who had some good connections inside the cantonment, to know about the fate of her brother. “About two hours later, Salahuddin informed us that all the detainees were dead. They were killed half-buried near Damdama Bridge,” she described. Fearing further attacks, she left the college campus and went to her Pirojpur village to join the rest of her family members and later went to India with them. Shova, who now lives in Kolkata, joined a camp of female freedom fighters in Gobra in India and took nursing training. She served freedom fighters in their camps inside the Indian territory. The proceeding of the case was adjourned till tomorrow when the defence is supposed to cross-examine the witness. On November 12, 2013, the Tribunal-1 indicted Azharul, former president of Rangpur district unit Islami Chhatra Sangha, the then student wing of Jamaat-e-Islami, on six charges of murder, genocide    and crimes against humanity committed during the Liberation War in 1971.
