Share true history of 1971 among youths
2020-07-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/share-true-history-1971-among-youths-1937845

An accurate history of the country's Liberation War should be shared among youths, Jatiya Sangsad Speaker Dr Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury said yesterday.

"Sharing the accurate history among new generations is our responsibility," she said while speaking at the award-giving ceremony of Bazlur Rahman Smriti Padak 2019.

The Speaker joined the programme virtually as chief guest, organised by the Liberation War Museum (LWM) at its auditorium.

LWM conferred the award to print and electronic media journalists for reports on the Liberation War.

She said many journalists are writing and presenting news, preparing documentaries on barbarism of the occupation forces as well as the sacrifices of freedom-loving people during the nine-month long war.

"Through all these, many new and unknown information regarding the 1971 Liberation War is coming up...," she said.

On the Bazlur Rahman Padak, she said it is an exceptional award as it is conferred on reports on the Liberation War.

Jury board chairman of the award and former Dhaka University Vice Chancellor AAMS Arefin Siddique said it is the duty of all to keep the history of the Liberation War alive among the new generation.

LWM trustee member secretary Sara Zaker spoke at the event.

Bazlur Rahman's wife and chairman of the parliamentary standing committee on agriculture ministry Matia Chowdhury was also present at the dais.

LWM introduced the award in 2008, with financial support from family members and friends of the late eminent journalist.

This year, Ijaj Ahmed, a reporter of Gazipur-based Daily Mukto Sangbad, and GM Faisal Alam, a reporter of Channel 24, received the award. They received crests and Tk 1 lakh each as prize money.

Hailed from Mymensingh, Bazlur Rahman was an eminent journalist, freedom fighter and children's organizer. He passed away in 2008.

He was conferred with Swadhinata Padak, Bangladesh's highest civilian honour, for his contribution to journalism in 2012 posthumously.

He was editor of Daily Sangbad, founder editor of the weekly Ekota, mouthpiece of the Communist Party of Bangladesh.

Bazlur Rahman participated in the 1971 Liberation War and also edited a magazine titled "Muktijuddha" during the period.

He was the chairman of the country's reputed children's organization Khelaghar.
