6-point demand brainchild of Bangabandhu alone: PM
2020-08-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/6-point-demand-brainchild-bangabandhu-alone-pm-1951453

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday said the historic six-point demand was solely the brainchild of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and nobody else was involved in formulating this crucial political programme that led the to the county's independence.

"Many people want to say many things regarding the six-point demand … some say it was done following suggestions from that person, some others say it was formulated with the advice from those persons. But I know for sure, it was his [Bangabandhu] brainchild," she said.

The PM was addressing a programme marking the distribution of awards among the winners of a quiz competition, organised on the occasion of the Six-point Demand Day (June 7).

Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Birth Centenary Celebration National Implementation Committee organised the event at the capital's International Mother Language Institute. The premier joined the programme virtually from the Gono Bhaban.

Hasina said Bangabandhu was arrested in 1958 and released on December 17, 1969. At that time, politics was banned. Bangabandhu could not go outside Dhaka, and he joined Alfa Insurance Company.

She mentioned that Tajuddin Ahmad was also under arrest at that time. After release, he went to Fatulla of Narayanganj to join his job. Bangabandhu himself went to Narayanganj, brought Tajuddin back to Dhaka and gave him a job at the insurance company.

The premier, who was studying at Dhaka University then, said the Father of the Nation had appointed Mohammad Hanif as his PA at Alfa Insurance Company.

"Bangabandhu used to think, write down those and gave those write-ups to Hanif for typing out. Here only Hanif knew about this [six-point demand] as he typed out that … nobody else would know about it."

Hasina said the six-point demand came from thoughts of Bangabandhu after the 1965 India-Pakistan war that lasted for three weeks and the then East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) was totally left defenseless.

She also said after the arrest of Bangabandhu and other front-ranking Awami League leaders due to the announcement of the six-point demand, Begum Fazilatunnesa Mujib had played a great role in publicising and advancing the movement over these demands.

The PM said the August-15, 1975, massacre had stopped Bangladesh's advancement.

Talking about the August-15 brutal killings of Bangabandhu and his family members, Hasina said the defeated force had emerged in the country through those killings and they tried to diminish its victory.

"I think there's no scope for that now … history takes its own course ... . Nobody can erase that and that is established today."

The PM said the government wanted to advance the country following the path shown by the Father of the Nation.

State Minister for ICT Division Zunaid Ahmed Palak also spoke on the occasion.

A documentary on Bangabandhu and the six-point demand was also screened at the programme.

Some 100 competitors received certificates, signed by the PM, and prize money for securing various positions in the quiz competition under different categories.
