“Bottomless basket”
2008-01-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Moinul Chowdhury, Gulshan, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-19641

The infamous Mr. Henry Kissinger was the foreign secretary of another infamous and disgraced ex-President of  the USA Mr. Nixon. Mr. Kissinger was known for his notorious foreign policies and as the  architect of heinous plots  aiming to eliminate popular leaders of other countries in the world,  albeit not compatible with so-called “American interest” and or to terminate popular struggles for independence by the nations who upheld socialist values. No wonder,  he despised the Liberation War of Bangladesh in 1971 that he considered as distraction to his top secret China venture and as a result not only under his advice America vetoed UNSC resolutions to stop the Pakistan army junta  from continuing the genocide in Bangladesh but also Sheikh Mujib found his place in Kissinger's list of the top three most hated leaders in the then world.

Therefore, it is an utter shame and disgrace for any Bangladeshi to quote, in support of his analogy of the state of the affairs of Bangladesh in any context, a crooked remark such as “bottomless basket” that came from a person of Mr. Kissinger's disrepute and appalling political track record!

In retrospection, in 1974 Sheikh Mujib inherited a war-torn country completely ravaged to the ground, millions of people displaced from home, businesses burnt down, empty banks, tens and thousands of Bangladeshis stranded in Pakistan threatened to be killed if PoWs  were not released,  anti-liberation forces still at large to complete their unfinished agenda and on top the world's most powerful country,  the USA, supported by oil reach Saudi Arabia  were up against and actively engaged to teach Mujib a lesson of his life! In all fairness,  when we evaluate Sheikh Mujib's performance in the post-liberation Bangladesh till the day of his tragic death,  at least now we should look at it impartially and dispassionately to do the justice he deserves. Compare that with the situation Bangladesh is going through now. This CTG is enjoying full support and backing of  the Army, media (no one is out there with a camera to recreate a 'fishing-net-clad mentally ill Bashanti'!) and civil bureaucracy at home and all the powerful govts e.g. USA, UK, EU who  came forward with all sorts of assistance and support,  sometimes even before asked, and yet the CTG is struggling to deal with only one challenge,  that is, the prices of essentials.

Ask them, it is way lot easier said than done!  If we are to move forward we must uphold neutrality and fairness in all areas of national interest. Unfair evaluation is also a form of corruption!
