Govt to build memorial honouring martyred intellectuals
2020-11-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/govt-build-memorial-honouring-martyred-intellectuals-1994085

November 13, 1972

MEMORIAL TO BE ERECTED

Prime Minister Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman today asks Works Minister Matiur Rahman to visit Katabari in Rayerbazar area to select a site for a memorial plaque bearing the names of the intellectuals who had been brutally murdered there by the Pakistan Army and their collaborators Al Badr on the eve of the surrender by the enemy in December, 1971. Bodies of some of the intellectuals were recovered from Katabari area, which the murderers had used as their slaughter ground. As the murderers had inflicted inhuman torture before killing their innocent victims the bodies were mostly mutilated beyond recognition.

Earlier, a delegation of the Bangla Department of Dhaka University called on the prime minister and suggested that the slaughter ground at Katabari be preserved as a historical site and a memorial plaque be erected there as a reminder to the nation of the great sacrifices that led to the independence of Bangladesh.

INDIAN, GDR ENVOYS CALL ON BANGABANDHU

Indian High Commissioner Subimal Dutta and German Democratic Republic (GDR) Ambassador to Bangladesh Winzel separately call on Bangabandhu at the Gono Bhaban today. Both meetings are unscheduled.

BIG PURCHASE OF JUTE BY INDIA

India will purchase huge quantities of raw jute from Bangladesh within July 1973. An agreement for the purchase of raw jute from Bangladesh is likely to be signed tomorrow. According to an informed source, India will initially purchase two lakh bales of raw jute from Bangladesh. The Indo-Bangladesh trade accord provides for the export of seven lakh bales of raw jute from Bangladesh on barter trade against imports from India. In India there are about 61 jute mills which are currently facing a shortage in the supply of raw jute.

RECOGNITION BY NICARAGUA

The Government of Nicaragua today accords formal recognition to Bangladesh as a sovereign and independent state. This brings the number of countries that have accorded recognition to Bangladesh to 94.

SOURCES: November 14, 1972 issues of Bangladesh Observer, Dainik Bangla and Dainik Ittefaq.
