‘Stop sale of weapons used in Liberation War’
2020-11-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/stop-sale-weapons-used-liberation-war-1995701

A writ petition was filed with the High Court yesterday challenging the government's move to sell the arms and weapons used during the Liberation War of Bangladesh in 1971.

ZI Khan Panna, a Supreme Court lawyer, and Ain O Salish Kendra (ASK), a leading rights organisation, jointly submitted the writ petition as a public interest litigation based on a report published on the daily Prothom Alo on October 5 saying that the government wishes to sell the arms and weapons used during the,country's Liberation War in 1971.

In the petition they sought necessary directives from the HC on the authorities concerned of the government not to sell or transfer the weapons to other parties and to preserve them as national heritage for the future generations..

In the petition, they said the Liberation  War, which led to the birth of Bangladesh, embodies the totality of the nation and its people.

"It is not only a mere emotion, it is more than emotion. It is us, our existence, our recognition and our breathing. It is what we are now and what we will be in future. The arms and weapons used during the Liberation War bear the marks of our struggles, fights, fear and sufferings. It will keep the spirit of the Liberation War alive from generations to generation," the petitioners said in the petition.

They stated in the petition, "These are not mere arms and weapons, these are the symbols of our national spirit. These are of high importance and value to every Bangladeshi person. The respondents being the custodian of the Republic cannot take any arbitrary decision which goes against the will of the people. Our liberation is the will of the people.  People don't want the arms and weapons used in 1971 to be sold. They want to preserve these arms and weapons as national heritage."

Petitioners ZI Khan Panna and ASK in the petition  also prayed to the HC to issue a rule asking the respondents to show causes why their plan to sell the arms and weapons to foreign buyers should not be declared illegal.

Secretaries to the ministries of defence, finance, libertarian war affairs and commerce have been mentioned as respondents in the required rule.

Md Shahinuzzaman, a lawyer for the petitioners, told The Daily Star the HC may hold hearing on the petition next week.
