Bangladesh can’t forget Pakistan’s atrocities in 1971: PM to Pakistan envoy
2020-12-03T19:33:46+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/bangladesh-cannot-forget-pakistan-atrocities-1971-pm-sheikh-hasina-to-pak-envoy-2005321

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today said Bangladesh cannot forget the atrocities committed by Pakistan in 1971.

"The incidents of 1971 can't be forgotten. The pain will remain forever," she told Pakistani High Commissioner to Dhaka Imran Ahmed Siddiqui at her official residence Gono Bhaban.

The prime minister extended greetings to her Pakistan counterpart Imran Khan when the high commissioner conveyed good wishes of the Pakistan PM to Sheikh Hasina.

Referring to volumes of a book titled "Secret Documents of Intelligence Branch on Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman", the prime minister said all can learn historical facts on the 1948-1971 period from the book.

She mentioned that the Urdu version of the book "Unfinished Memoirs" by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman is one of the bestsellers in Pakistan.

The high commissioner said the Pakistani PM advised them to learn about the development miracle of Bangladesh.

Mentioning that different bilateral and regional forums have remained inactive, he sought help from the Bangladesh prime minister to activate Foreign Office consultations between the two countries.

In reply, the prime minister said there is no bar here to the continuation of functioning regularly.

The new envoy said Pakistan wants to boost ties with Bangladesh without any obstruction.

In response, the PM said she believes in regional cooperation.

Referring to Bangladesh's foreign policy "friendship to all malice towards none", PM Hasina said that she believes in continuing relationships with countries based on different perspectives.

The high commissioner appreciated Sheikh Hasina for her statesmanship in the global arena.

The prime minister welcomed the high commissioner and assured him of extending all-out cooperation.

PM's Principal Secretary Dr Ahmad Kaikaus and Military Secretary Major General Naqib Ahmed Chowdhury were present, said a handout released from the Prime Minister's Office.
