Gems of Nazrul to spread hope on Victory Day in these troubling times
2020-12-10T14:01:00+06:00 | Ashley Shoptorshi Samaddar
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/gems-nazrul-spread-hope-victory-day-these-troubling-times-2009085

To celebrate the Victory Day of Bangladesh, Gems of Nazrul will release their 14th production internationally at 12:01 am on December 16, 2020.

The music video has been solely sponsored by HSBC Bangladesh. It will also be available on Gems of Nazrul's YouTube Channel.

The video will be premiered  on Channel i as a tribute to the valiant Freedom Fighters who dedicated their lives for our independence.

Being a Rebel himself, National Poet Kazi Nazrul Islam inspired generations through his spirited, bold and artistic creations.

Bearing this in mind, Gems of Nazrul will be performing a medley of his songs, "Bolo Nahi Bhoy" and "Mora Jhonjhar Moto Uddam" to motivate  the new generation to combat this pandemic bravely and towards building a brighter future.

The performance is conceptualised and directed by noted Nazrul singer and journalist Sadya Afreen Mallick. "National Poet Nazrul has been our inspiration and motivation during crises. We will celebrate our Victory Day with his inspirational songs. We would like to thank the frontline fighters who are serving humanity during this great crisis," shares Sadya Afreen Mallick. "We appreciate the bold steps taken by the singers, musicians and the entire cast and crew, who have performed in the music video in these trying times, keeping utmost safety in mind."

Renowned composer Ibrar Tipu is the music arranger, while Rommo Khan is the video director for the production. The video has been shot at two historic locations – Bangla Academy and Suhrawardy Udyan.

The song will be accompanied by a colourful dance recital, choreographed by noted Manipuri dancer Warda Rihab and performed by Dhriti Nortonaloy. "Compositions by Nazrul always  inspires us and keeps us motivated," says Warda Rihab, who will be seen in the performance with 25 other mesmerising dancers. "This time, we have worked on two numbers and both the routines have not only managed to restore our courage in such tough times but also brought all of us together in one platform to celebrate our independence."

The performance features over 40 prominent and promising Nazrul singers, including eminent singers Sadya Afreen Mallick, Dalia Nausheen,  Fatema Tuz Zohra, Yasmin Mustari, Khairul Anam Shakil, Roushan Ara Shoma, Kolpona Anam, Karim Hasan Khan, Shahid Kabir Polash,  Bijon Chandra Mistry, Mahmudul Hassan,  Tanzina Karim Sharalipi, Barnali Sarkar and Ishrat Jahan Meem.
