Bishworang’s colourful Victory Day with renowned artists
2020-12-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Rasheek Tabassum Mujib
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/bishworangs-colourful-victory-day-renowned-artists-2009797

Renowned artists Jamal Uddin Ahmed, Farida Zaman, Kanak Chanpa Chakma, Rokeya Sultana and Mohammad Eunus have made outstanding contributions to the art scene of Bangladesh. This year, popular fashion house Bishworang has collaborated with them for their Bijoy Dibosh (Victory Day) collection. The vibrant and bright colours of Bishowrang's designs bring out the festive aspect of the occasion, as we celebrate our Bijoy Dibosh on December 16.

"These artists are my teachers. They  represent our country to the world, through their work," shares Biplob Saha, the owner of Bishworang and a former student of the Faculty of Fine Art (FFA), University of Dhaka (DU). "This was my way of paying my respect to my teachers and also to my beloved country."

The versatility, splendour and creativity of these artists inspire generations of art enthusiasts.

"We wanted to participate in this project, as Biplob is a very dear student of ours and the brand that he has built over the years represents the traditions and heritage of Bangladesh," says Mohammad Eunus. "As we approach 50 years of our independence, I have been reflecting on the colours of our flag and its symbol. In these troubling times, we must keep the true essence of our liberation alive in our hearts."

Mohammad Eunus has been depicting abstract, semi-abstract and pure-abstract works for over four decades. The painter has many national and international awards to his credit, including the Grand Award in Japan and an honourable mention award in Asian Art Biennale Bangladesh.

The pandemic has allowed Mohammad Eunus to spend more time at home with his art. "I've been painting, and participating in online exhibitions throughout the year," he adds.

Ekushey Padak-winning artist Farida Zaman's series, "Sufia",  captures  the intrinsic characteristics of rural women. She is an honourary professor at the Department of Drawing and Painting, FFA, DU.

Rokeya Sultana's series, "Madonna", represents the everyday woman. For her outstanding contributions to different forms of art, she has received many awards and accolades worldwide. She is a professor at the Department of Printmaking, FFA, DU.

Kanak Chanpa Chakma has won national and international awards, and is renowned for her paintings depicting the lives of Bangladeshi ethnic minorities, focusing on the lives of women.

These three artists have encouraged generations of women through their explorations of womanhood on their canvas.

" Bijoy Dibosh is a joyous occasion, and each year, our country celebrates the vibrant spirit of the day through grand events,"  expresses Kanak Chanpa Chakma. "But this year, we will have to celebrate on a limited scale, as the dangers of the coronavirus continues to worry us all."

Jamal Uddin Ahmed is a professor at the Department of Drawing and Painting, FFA, DU. He is known for his artwork series on pigeons, horses, boats, gypsies, flood victims, fishermen, marine life and the mystic troubadours of Bangladesh. He received the Ekushey Padak in 2019, for his contribution to fine arts.

"We will spend this year's Bijoy Dibosh at home and the festivities will continue online," says Jamal Uddin Ahmed. He further adds that modelling for the special collection of Bishworang was an amazing experience.

Keeping the essence of Bijoy Dibosh in mind, Biplob Saha reflects on the importance of culture and heritage in inspiring future generations. "As a fashion house, it is our responsibility to represent our flag and our country through our designs," he shares. "We aim to inspire the next generations to appreciate the spirit of our Liberation War and independence."
