Sixty-one more recognised as Biranganas
2020-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/news/sixty-one-more-recognised-biranganas-2011961

The government has recognised 61 more Biranganas (war heroines) for their contribution and sacrifice during the country's Liberation War in 1971.

The recognition comes a day before the country goes into its 50th Victory Day celebration.

The Ministry of Liberation War Affairs yesterday issued a gazette notification in this regard. With the latest inclusion, a total of 400 Biranganas received the status of freedom fighters.

At least 1.62 lakh women were raped and another 1.31 lakh Hindu women went missing during the War, according to the War Crimes Facts and Findings Committee led by Dr M Hassan.

The Hindu women were believed to have been raped and killed in the Pakistan army camps.

The process of recognising Biranganas as freedom fighters started following a High Court order on January 27, 2014.

It asked the government to explain why it should not be directed to upgrade the social status of war heroines and provide them with state honour and facilities like those of freedom fighters.

Every recognised Birangana will now receive a monthly allowance of Tk 12,000 and special quota in government jobs and benefits for their children and grandchildren.

This year, the nation is going to celebrate its Victory Day, the most prestigious day for Bangalees, in a different manner on the account of ongoing pandemic.

The government has initiated elaborate programmes to celebrate the day at the national level, maintaining Covid-19 health guidelines.

The programmes include a 31-gun salute, placing of wreaths at the monuments to pay homage to martyrs, hoisting the national flag atop all government, semi-government and private offices, as well as offices of autonomous bodies across the country, decorating city streets with miniature national flags and colourful festoons, and illumination of important buildings and establishments, roads and street islands at night.

This year, President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina will not visit the National Memorial at Savar.

On behalf of them, tributes will be paid to Liberation War martyrs by placing wreaths.

Besides, the traditional parade with the participation of different contingents of the Bangladesh Army, Navy and Air Force, as well as Freedom Fighters' contingent, Para-military forces and law enforcement agencies at the National Parade Ground on the victory day will not be held this year due to Covid-19.

Special prayers will be offered at mosques and other places of worship, seeking eternal peace for the departed souls of martyrs and good health of injured freedom fighters as well as peace, progress and prosperity of the country.

To mark the day, a public holiday, national dailies will bring out special supplements on the occasion while Bangladesh Postal Department will release memorial postal stamps to mark the day.

State-owned and private television and radio channels will broadcast special programmes highlighting the Liberation War.

President M Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina issued separate messages for the eve of Independence Day.

In his message, President Hamid put emphasis on institutionalising democracy and developing a culture of absolute tolerance and mutual respect to provide the benefits of independence to people's doorsteps.

The PM in her message urged everyone to unite against all communal evil forces and thwart any conspiracy against the country, democracy and government.

She also urged all to follow health guidelines and play their due roles in maintaining the country's development, progress and continuity of democracy.
