Victory Day specials to watch on TV
2020-12-15T15:19:41+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/victory-day-specials-watch-tv-2011793

Due to the ongoing pandemic, the people of Bangladesh will be celebrating Victory Day (December 16) on a limited scale this year. On this occasion, The Daily Star brings you a compilation of some of the finest television shows that will be aired on the top TV channels of the country.

Written and directed by Anik Biswas, the single-episode television drama, "Jononir Chokh", featuring Nusrat Imrose Tisha, Shahed Ali Shujon and Hasnat Ripon among others, will air on Banglavision at 9:05 pm tomorrow. The show is based on a story written by Syed Iqbal.

Written and directed by Bratya Amin, a documentary film on the first naval command expedition, "Operation Jackpot" will air on Deepto TV at 8 am on December 16. Dr Nizamuddin Jami, Sarowar Soikat and Bratya Amin were involved in the making of this documentary.

A special episode of the musical programme, "Boishakhi'r Shokaler Gaan", will feature popular singer Timir Nandi of Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendra. The musical programme will air on Boishakhi TV at 8:20 am tomorrow.

The special programme, "Bijoyer Golpo" featuring renowned actor and freedom fighter Raisul Islam Asad, will air on Duronto TV at 5 pm tomorrow. Raisul Islam Asad will be sharing his experiences of the war with a group of children at the National Martyrs' Memorial during the programme.

The special talk show, "Chorompotro", produced by Sohel Rana Sabuj, will air on ETV at 6:30 pm on Victory Day. Hosted by Piyush Bandopadhyay, renowned novelist Selina Hossain will be present as the guest in the show.

The telefilm "Mukti", directed by Shafiul Alam Babu and featuring Shatabdi Wadud in a lead role, will air on ATN at 8:45 pm tomorrow.

The telefilm "Meghnar-71", based on a young girl's experience of war, will air on Duronto TV at 3 pm tomorrow. Written and directed by Shamim Akter, the show features Bonna Mirza, Sadia Yusum Brita, Kiana, Shahid Bahadur, Enahum Hasan Akash and Moumita Mehezabin Orpa among others.
