Tangail to get Liberation War Memorial Centre in Mujib Year
2020-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Tangail
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/tangail-get-liberation-war-memorial-centre-mujib-year-2011389

People in Tangail are going to get Bangabandhu and Liberation War Memorial Centre near the Badhyabhumi (mass killing ground) in the town on the occasion of Mujib Year.

Walton Group of Industries is set to build the war memorial centre. Earlier, the district administration proposed vice chairman SM Nurul Alam Rezvy of the group to construct the centre. Rezvy hails from Tangail.

With the construction of the war memorial centre, the long-cherished demand of Tangail people is going to be fulfilled.

Deputy Commissioner (DC) Md Ataul Gani has already given a written permission to Walton authorities in this regard with five conditions.

The conditions include inclusion of spirit of Liberation War in the design and installation of sculpture of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at the entrance of the centre.

The DC said Tangail district has played a glorious role during the Liberation War. The brave freedom fighters in the district took part in battle fields and fought against the Pakistani occupation forces during 1971.

Construction of the memorial plaque is a long-cherished demand of the brave freedom fighters as well as pro-liberation forces in the district, he said.

"To make the Mujib Year memorable, we proposed the Walton authorities for construction of a four-story foundation structure of Bangabandhu and Liberation War Centre on the government land near the killing ground. The Walton authorities gladly accepted the proposal," said the DC.

"Earlier, we held discussion with local public representatives, local freedom fighters, civil society representatives and journalists in this regard," he said.

"The Walton authorities have informed me that they will start the construction works by this month of victory," the DC added.

On April 3 in 1971, the Pakistani army entered Tangail town after breaking the resistance of the local freedom fighters. The occupation forces made their base in Tangail Circuit House.

During the Liberation War, the Pakistan army and their local collaborators took the detained freedom fighters and freedom seeking people to the circuit house almost every day and tortured them.

Later, they killed them after taking them to the adjacent Water Tank in Zila Sadar area. Such killings continued till December 11, the day the district was freed from Pakistan occupation forces.

Since then the mass killing ground of Liberation War martyrs had been lying in utter negligence.

The then district administrations in 1996 first took initiative to detect the killing ground while a memorial plaque was constructed there in 2017.

Last year, Md Shahidul Islam, the then deputy commissioner in Tangail, took initiative for perseverance and construction of new memorial plaque at the killing ground.
