DU Film Society’s ‘Smritir Bijoy’ shines a light on the true spirit of the Liberation War
2020-12-17T18:01:18+06:00 | Rasheek Tabassum Mujib
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/du-film-societys-smritir-bijoy-shines-light-the-true-spirit-the-liberation-war-2012969

On the occasion of the Martyred Intellectuals Day and the Victory Day of Bangladesh, Dhaka University Film Society (DUFS) arranged a three-day programme. The event titled, "Smritir Bijoy", started on December 14 to commemorate the Martyred Intellectuals of 1971.

At the event, students arranged a Pradeep Projjolon ceremony (lighting of candles), fanush (paper lanterns) flying, open film screenings, an art camp, a discussion session and cultural performances.

On the evening of December 14, students and the general public participated in a Pradeep Projjolon (candle lighting ceremony) at the Smriti Chiranton, to pay respect to the martyred intellectuals. Due to the global pandemic, the discussion session was held online via Facebook. Several members of the martyred intellectual's family were present at the session. Asif Munier, son of martyr Munier Chowdhury, Tauhid Reza Noor, son of martyr Sirajuddin Hossain, Tanvir Haider Chaudhury, son of martyr Dr Mofazzal Haider Chaudhury and Shantanu Majumdar, Professor, Department of Political Science, Dhaka University were present at the event.

Family members of the Martyred Intellectuals shared their views about present Bangladesh, their expected dreams and aspirations, the young generation and their right to know the right history, among many other aspects.

"Every family has stories and recollections of the war, we don't yet know about all the sacrifices our freedom fighters and martyrs made," shares Asif Munier. "More efforts should be given on preserving the works of our intellectuals and the right history of the Liberation War."

"We dream and hope for a Bangladesh, where statues, sculptures, art and songs co-exist together. This Bangladesh should be about liveliness and resilience, where people from all walks of life coexist together, sharing their own culture," expresses Tanvir Haider Chaudhury, about his views on the recent unrest across the country. "This vision of Bangladesh is why we fought in 1971 and this was why our fathers sacrificed their lives."

"We expect the young generation to ask us questions about the correct history, it is their right and depriving them of it is a crime," adds Asif Munier.

On December 15, an art camp titled, "Moulobad Birodhi Bijoy Art Camp" was arranged at the premises of TSC (Teacher Student Center) of DU. Artistes portrayed their expressions about 'Anti-fundamentalism' through artworks. The artworks were exhibited at TSC on December 15-16.

A new segment, "Amar Bhashkorjo" (My Sculpture) was introduced this year. General people were encouraged to participate in this programme to make a sculpture of their choice. "Our aim was to instill the idea in people's minds that sculptures do not pose a threat to religion," shares Ferdous Khan Nirjhar, President, Dhaka University Film Society. "Sculptures are a medium of art used to capture the expressions of the mind and it does not clash with religion in any way."

An open screening session on films of the Liberation War was arranged on the evening of December 16 at TSC. The acclaimed documentary, "Muktir Gaan" and Major Khaled's "War" were screened at the event.

"We decided to arrange this event even during a pandemic, as we felt the urge to address fundamentalism and its harmful effects," shares Nirjhar. "This year's theme was Anti-fundamentalism and this was a part of our ongoing cultural protest against fundamentalism."

The spontaneous participation of the public made the event a success. The event followed basic social distancing policies and proper health safety guidelines.
