Notable films based on the Liberation War
2020-12-16T15:33:03+06:00 | Zahid Akbar
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/notable-films-based-the-liberation-war-2012333

A good number of movies were made on the Liberation War of Bangladesh, which can be watched in December, the month of our victory.

The Khan Ataur Rahman directorial "Abar Tora Manush Ho", highlights the social contexts of our country, post liberation. It features Farooque, Babita, Raisul Islam Asad, Rosy Afsari and Rawshan Jamil among others.

"Ora Egaro Jon" directed by Chashi Nazrul Islam is one of the first movies based on the Liberation War of 1971. The film was released in 1972, featuring Razzak, Shabana, Nutan, Syed Hasan Imam, ATM Shamsuzzaman, annd Khalilullah Khan among others. The film focuses on real freedom fighters such as Khasru, Murad, Helal and Nantu.

In 1976, the Harunur Rashid directorial "Megher Onek Rong" was released. The plot is set during the war, where a lady named Ruma, wife of a doctor and a rape victim, struggles with her life. It features Mathin, Omar Elahhi, Rawshan Ara and Adnan.

"Dhire Bohe Meghna" directed by Alamgir Kabir tells the story of Anita, an Indian lady whose lover sacrifices his life in the war. She comes to Dhaka and witnesses the horrific events of the ongoing war. The film features Babita, Bulbul Ahmed and Gulam Mustafa among others.

The Humayun Ahmed directorial "Aguner Poroshmoni" is another film based on the Liberation War of Bangladesh. The film is based on Humayun's novel. Released in 1994, it features Asaduzzaman Noor, Abul Hayat, Bipasha Hayat and Dolly Zahur among others.

Tauquir Ahmed made his debut as a film director with "Joyjatra", which was released in 2004. The story of the film was written by Amzad Hossain. It depicts the struggles of a group of people during the war. The film features Tariq Anam Khan, Humayun Faridee, Abul Hayat, Mahfuz Ahmed, Bipasha Hayat and Chandni among others.

The Nasir Uddin Yousuff directorial "Guerilla" is based on Syed Shamsul Haque's novel 'Nishiddho Loban'. Released in 2011, it features Jaya Ahsan, Ferdous, ATM Shamsuzzaman, Raisul Islam Asad, Pijush Bandyopadhyay, Shatabdi Wadud, Shampa Reza and Gazi Rakayet among others.

Based on Dr Muhammad Zafar Iqbal's children's novel, the film "Amar Bondhu Rashed" was directed by Morshedul Islam. The film was released in 2011, featuring Chowdhury Zawata Afnan, Raisul Islam Asad, Pijush Bandyopadhyay, Enamul Haque, Humaira Himu, Arman Parvez Murad, Wahida Mollick Jolly, and Gazi Rakayet.

The Reazul Rezu directorial "Baapjaner Bioscope" is another film made on the Liberation War of Bangladesh. Released in 2015, it features Shahiduzzaman Selim, Shatabdi Wadud and Sanjida Tanmoy among others.

Translated by Sharmin Joya
