Mujibnagar officials to get 9 months’ arrears
2020-12-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/mujibnagar-officials-get-9-months-arrears-2013649

December 19, 1972

BANGABANDHU LAUDS SERVICES OF PROVISIONAL GOVT

Prime Minister Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman acknowledges the highest sense of patriotism and sacrifice of the officials who helped run the provisional government from Mujibnagar. While addressing a function arranged by Mujibnagar Karmachari Samity, Bangabandhu says today that the independence of the country has been their greatest reward. He announces the government's decision to pay nine months' arrears to the officials who worked from Mujibnagar. This announcement is greeted with cheers.

Bangabandhu, however, upbraids the officials who stayed back and helped the occupation forces.

IMPART VOCATIONAL TRAINING TO YOUTH: BANGABANDHU

Bangabandhu has stressed the paramount need to impart vocational training to the youth of the country. He tells a delegation of the teachers of the technical institute of Mohammadpur that the new nation needs a large number of technically trained hands who would contribute their expertise to the development of the country. The prime minister points out that since Bangla has become the national language of the country, a large number of stenos and typists are urgently needed to take over the responsibilities of the large number of stenos and typists now working in English.

BHUTTO ENVISAGES SOME KIND OF LINK WITH BANGLADESH

Pakistan President Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto has envisaged some kind of link with Bangladesh. "A time will come when some kind of relationship will be established between us and the Muslim Bengal. We look forward to the moment when our differences with our brotherly people of 'Muslim Bengal' will cease to exist. No power on earth can prevent this," he adds.

INDIAN ARTISTS CALL ON BANGABANDHU

A group of Indian artists led by Gouriprasanna Majumdar calls on the Bangabandhu at the Gono Bhaban today. The artists now on a tour of Bangladesh stay with the prime minister for some time.

Source: December 20, 1972 issues of Dainik Bangla, The Bangladesh Observer and Ittefaq.
