Kushtia SP’s statement in favour of Liberation War, say 11 noted citizens
2020-12-27T22:37:43+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/kushtia-sps-statement-favour-liberation-war-say-11-noted-citizens-2018121

Eleven noted citizens in a joint statement said Kushtia Superintendent of Police SM Tanvir Arafat's recent statement, about the vandalism of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and revolutionary Bagha Jatin's statues, was in favour of the spirit of the Liberation War.

The citizens are Sarwar Ali, Ramendu Majumdar, Abdus Selim, Mamunur Rashid, Mofidul Hoque, Shahriar Kabir, Muntassir Mamoon, Nasiruddin Yousuff, Golam Kuddus, Hasan Arif, and Ahkamullah.

"Kushtia Superintendent of Police SM Tanvir Arafat has given a statement on the issue of vandalism of the sculptures of Bangabandhu and revolutionary Bagha Jatin in the district. Like many others, we have had the opportunity to listen to the speeches on YouTube and we think the police officer has spoken in favour of the Liberation War of Bangladesh. His statement has once again clarified the basic aspirations behind Bangabandhu's ideology and the armed struggle through which Bangladesh earned its independence," the statement read.

"Hefazat-e-Islam's statement against the SP's comment has clarified their stance against the spirit of the Liberation War of 1971," the statement added.

"It is well known that on the night of March 25, 1971, Bangladesh Police formed the first resistance against the Pakistani forces. We have noticed in the speech of the Kushtia SP that it has been inspired by the rebellious consciousness of the historic Rajarbagh resistance. He has taken a conscious and strong stance for Bangladesh's war of independence."

"We know very well this vested quarter which opposes the statement of the SP. These are the defeated evil forces of 1971. A generation that emerged from the barbaric Pakistanis. At different times they come to the fore with different identities. Sometimes as Jamaat-Shibir. Sometimes as Hefazat. They still do not believe in the independence of Bangladesh. For this reason, they have dared to vandalise the sculpture of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. After this, they cannot be spared anymore. That is why we think that the SP has given a final warning to these extremists," read the joint statement.

"However, we see that extremists are misinterpreting the statement of Kushtia SP and are issuing threats. This is nothing but a tactical attempt to divert public attention from the issue of vandalism of sculptures and arrest of the people behind this," the statement added.

"In this situation, we strongly demand prompt arrest of the perpetrators…" it added.

On December 21, during a protest rally against vandalism of the sculptures, SP Tanvir reportedly warned vested groups to refrain from raising questions about Bangladesh's independence.
