A freedom fighter’s forever war
2021-01-04T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/editorial/news/freedom-fighters-forever-war-2021837

It shames us as a nation that a freedom fighter who fought for the independence of this country in 1971 has to scrape a living singing on the streets in his twilight years. According to a report by The Daily Star , Dilip Kumar Dey, 80, lives in the Bangra union of Kalihati, Tangail. Every day he leaves home to sing near schools, colleges, bus stands and marketplaces, and returns with whatever money people give him out of sympathy to supplement the meagre earnings of his sons, with whom the widower lives. Old and unable to do anything else, Dilip has been earning a living in this way for the last few decades. His story is not unlike that of many elderly beggars and homeless people living on the outermost fringes of our society, except that he is a freedom fighter, to whom we owe our very existence as a sovereign nation. Dilip fought in Sector 11 during the war, under the command of Colonel Abu Taher. For his service, he was given a house where the family now lives and receives an allowance of Tk 12,000.

This may seem enough of a repayment for a debt of gratitude. But for someone with no formal education who has had to carry the burden of supporting a big family all his life and marrying off his sister and daughters—and on whose earnings his poor, illiterate sons also depend—it is precious little. Much of Dilip's income also goes into repaying loans. He needs proper livelihood support, not mere cash handouts, to live the last days of his life with dignity. Unfortunately, many elderly people in our society are going through the same condition, each day spent worrying where the next meal will come from. They also need support and protection in equal measure.

The strength of a state is known by how well it takes care of its weakest members. In that respect, the Bangladesh government has a lot to do for the many poor older people, women and children across the country who are struggling to meet their basic needs, a reality compounded by the pandemic that has pushed countless families into extreme poverty. The elders especially need proper care and attention. And poor freedom fighters like Dilip Kumar who are living a life of mercy certainly deserve better. The government must come forward and do more for them.
