Produce high-quality films on Liberation War to counter distortion of history: PM
2021-01-17T14:34:27+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/produce-high-quality-films-liberation-war-counter-distortion-history-pm-2029253

Noting that the government will develop infrastructures needed for filmmaking up to upazila-level, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today urged filmmakers to produce high-quality films -- upholding the glorious history and spirit of the Liberation War -- for future generations in order to counter distorted history.

"The history of our Liberation War was distorted after the killing of the Father of the Nation on August 15, 1975. I'd like to request you to uphold the history that we are the victorious nation. We earned victory through the Liberation War. We need to make more such films so that the future generations can learn about the history of our victory," she said.

She came up with the call while addressing the distribution ceremony of the National Film Awards-2019 at Bangabandhu International Conference Centre (BICC) virtually from her official residence Gono Bhaban.

The awards were conferred upon 33 recipients under 26 categories. On the Prime Minister's behalf, Information Minister Dr Hasan Mahmud handed over the awards and certificates.

Hasina stressed the need for reflection of the great achievements, history, ideology and spirit of the Liberation War in films, which she noted can be etched in people's hearts through a movie or drama.

The PM said the government will do everything necessary to modernise the film industry. "We're forming a fund to develop infrastructures up to upazila level so that films can be screened properly and people can get a scope of recreation," she said.

Lifetime Achievement Awards were given to renowned actors Masud Parvez (Sohel Rana) and Kohinoor Akhter Suchanda for their remarkable contributions to the film industry.

"No Dorai" and "Fagun Haway" jointly won the award in the Best Film category. Mahbubur Rahman (Producer of "No Dorai") and Shykh Seraj, on behalf of Faridur Reza Sagar (Producer of "Fagun Haway") received the awards at the function.

Tariq Anam Khan was given the award for Best Actor in lead role for the film "Abar Boshonto" while Sunerah Binte Kamal received the Best Actress in lead role award for "No Dorai".
