Obaidul Quader belongs to a razakar family
2021-01-23T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Noakhali
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/obaidul-quader-belongs-razakar-family-2032313

Ekramul Karim Chowdhury, Awami League lawmaker from Noakhali-4, has alleged that party General Secretary Obaidul Quader belongs to a razakar's family.

The lawmaker, also the general secretary of Noakhali district AL, came up with the allegation while speaking on Facebook Live from his verified Facebook account around midnight on Thursday.

"I will not talk about Mirza Quader. I will talk about Obaidul Quader. A man who belongs to a razakar's family has reached this level, but he cannot discipline his brother. I will talk on these issues within a few days. I will start with this if the district Awami League committee is not announced," Ekramul said in his 27-second Facebook Live message.

The footage, however, was removed from his Facebook account within a few minutes. But it later went viral on social media.

Talking to reporters yesterday, the lawmaker said though he removed the footage from his Facebook account, his statement against the AL general secretary's family was true and he spoke the truth.

"You will be able to know who were the razakars in his family if you, the media personnel, look into it," the MP said.

"MP Obaidul Quader is a freedom fighter. His younger brother Abdul Quader Mirza has been talking rubbish about Awami League leaders of different levels. But he [Obaidul Quader] cannot keep his brother under control. That's why I made such statements," Ekramul added.

Asked about the MP's allegation, Quader Mirza, also the mayor-elect of Basurhat Municipality, yesterday said, "He [Ekramul] has to provide proof about who is the razakar in our family. Otherwise, his trial would be held in people's court. If I am found guilty, my trail will be held."

He said his family and his father made significant contributions to the Liberation War. "Obaidul Quader was a frontline freedom fighter. Rather, members of Ekram Chowdhury's family betrayed the party [Awami League] and its leaders time and again."

Quader Mirza said there were conspiracies going on against him and his family members as he spoke the truth. "I will continue speaking the truth until my death."

Meanwhile, Md Riaz Uddin, general secretary of Oshodia Union Jubo League in Noakhali Sadar upazila, on Thursday filed a petition with Noakhali Chief Judicial Magistrate's Court to record a defamation case against Quader Mirza.

But no action was taken in this regard that day as the magistrate was on leave, petitioner's lawyer Palash Chandra Shah said.

Also on Thursday, Companiganj upazila AL and its associated bodies brought out a procession and held a rally in the upazila town in the afternoon protesting the filing of a "false" case against Quader Mirza.

Supporters of Ekramul also brought out another procession in Maijdi town early yesterday. They chanted slogans against Quader Mirza.

A tense situation was prevailing in Maijdi and Companiganj following the protests.
