PM pays tribute to Bangabandhu on Mujibnagar Day
2014-04-17T11:02:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/pm-pays-tribute-to-bangabandhu-on-mujibnagar-day-20420

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid glowing homage to Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman by placing floral wreaths at his portrait at the Bangabandhu Memorial Museum in Dhanmondi marking the historic Mujibnagar Day.

Hasina first placed a wreath at the portrait as the prime minister around 7:00am.

She stood there in solemn silence for sometimes as a mark of respects to the Architect of the Nation.

Later, flanked by senior leaders of her party, Hasina as the president of Awami League placed another wreath at the portrait of Bangabandhu.

Deputy Leader of Jatiya Sangsad Syeda Sajeda Chowdhury, Commerce Minister Tofael Ahmed, Agriculture Minister Begum Matia Chowdhury, Post and Telecommunications Minister Abdul Latif Siddiqui, Awami League Presidium members Sheikh Fazlul Karim Selim and Advocate Sahara Khatun, Communications Minister Obaidul Quader, Railways Minister Mujibul Haque, AL Advisory Council member Advocate Yosuf Hossain Humayun, State Minister for Foreign Affairs M Shahriar Alam, AL leaders Dr Hasan Mahmood, Abdus Sobhan Golap and Pankaj Debnath were present.

The historic Mujibnagar Day is being observed today to mark the formation of Bangladesh's first government to lead the War of Liberation in 1971.

Senior leaders of Awami League assembled at Baidyanathtala in Meherpur on April 17 to form the provisional government of independent Bangladesh in the absence of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman who was arrested and flown to Pakistan after Pakistan military cracked down on the Bengalees on the night of March 25, 1971.

Baidyanathtala, then a mango orchard, was later named as Mujibnagar.

Bangabandhu was declared the first president of the People's Republic of Bangladesh while Vice-president Syed Nazrul Islam became the acting president in the absence of Bangabandhu.

Tajuddin Ahmad was appointed the first prime minister while Khandoker Moshtaque Ahmed, M Mansur Ali and AHM Quamaruzzaman were named cabinet members.
