Present authentic Liberation War history before new generation
2021-02-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/present-authentic-liberation-war-history-new-generation-2045609

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday asked all concerned to present the authentic history of the Liberation War before the new generation.

"History can't be erased. The authentic history of the Liberation War will have to be projected before the new generation," she said while addressing the 66th trustee board meeting of the Freedom Fighters Welfare Trust (FFWT) from her official residence Gono Bhaban.

Other members of the trustee board connected to the event from Osmani Memorial Auditorium.

PM's Deputy Press Secretary KM Shakhawat Moon briefed reporters after the meeting.

Sheikh Hasina asked authorities concerned to preserve graveyards of freedom fighters and build memorial museums, so generation after generation can know the accurate history of the Liberation War.

She asked the trustee board members to identify insolvent freedom fighters and their family members and stand by them.

The PM said her government will build homes for all insolvent freedom fighters and their families.

The Prime Minister asked all concerned to speed up activities of the trustee board and stressed the need for holding regular meetings. She said Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had formed the trust for the welfare of the country's best sons.

At the meeting, Sheikh Hasina recalled with due respect Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman under whose leadership the country was liberated, four national leaders, martyred freedom fighters, and others who made the supreme sacrifice in all democratic and progressive movements.

Trustee board members, Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque, Awami League Presidium Member Shajahan Khan, Mostafizur Rahman Fizar and Liberation War Affairs Ministry Secretary Tapan Kanti Ghosh were present, among others.
