Indian High Commission announces winners of essay competition on Liberation War
2021-02-16T22:06:17+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/world/south-asia/news/indian-high-commission-announces-winners-essay-competition-liberation-war-2045949

The winners of an essay competition on "What Liberation Means to Me" have been announced at an event at the Indian High Commission, Dhaka, yesterday.

The winners under category A (Bangla) are champion: AfsaraTasnim, University of Dhaka; first runner up: Farsia Kawsar Chowdhury, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology; second runner up: Rana Mozumdar, University of Dhaka; fourth: Tilak Saha, University of Dhaka; fifth: Kaikobad Mahmud, University of Dhaka; sixth: Rubaid Ahmed, University of Chittagong and seventh: Tanzila Akter, University of Dhaka.

The winners under category B (English) are champion: Maliha Momtaz Oishi, Viqarunnisa Noon School and College; first runner up: Ipshita Kajuri, North South University; second runner up: Manosh Chandra Haldar, National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur, India; fourth: Fakeha Yasmine, Independent University, Bangladesh; fifth: Md Ismail Murshed, BRAC University; sixth: Md. Aftahi Islam Nayan, University of Barishal; and seventh: Protyasha Ghosh, BRAC University.

Champions of each category were awarded with laptops, the first and second runner up received Tabs. Other winners received a smartphone, along with a crest, certificate and book. The top essays from each category will be published in "Bharat Bichitra" magazine.

The essay writing competition organized by Youth Opportunities in collaboration with the High Commission of India, Dhaka to provide Bangladeshi youth a platform to show their creativity and share their own understanding and meaning of "Liberation".

It received over 1050 submissions from across the country and abroad.

State Minister for ICT Division, Zunaid Ahmed Palak MP, addressed the occasion as chief guest.

The Daily Star and DBC News were the Media Partners of the competition, while Prothom Alo Bondhushava was the community partner.
