‘Muktijuddho Olympiad’ launched
2021-02-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Farhat Chowdhury
https://www.thedailystar.net/star-youth/news/muktijuddho-olympiad-launched-2047533

Celebrating 50 years of the independence of Bangladesh, The Daily Star recently launched 'Muktijuddho Olympiad', in partnership with food-tech company efood. It is the largest Olympiad based on the Liberation War of 1971.

It intends to disseminate information and facts about the war, and inspire today's youth by informing them about the heroic activities and resilience that our freedom fighters displayed in the fight to free the country. Participants can register in any of the categories: School students (Class 4 - Class 6 and Class 7 – Class 10), College students and University students. They need to register in the official site of the Olympiad, download the relevant question banks and prepare for the online round, which will take place from February 21 to 25.

The subsequent rounds will take place virtually and will be aired live on the official Facebook page of The Daily Star. This competition is scheduled to end with a grand finale on March 26, the Independence Day of Bangladesh.

The event has received praise from students, teachers, and parents. "It is indeed a great way to make our kids learn about the war that eventually resulted in the birth of Bangladesh," says Tahera Hossain, the mother of a fifth grader. "I am glad to see my son embrace the spirit of the Olympiad and participate in it."

Zakir Iqbal, a high school teacher, shared his opinion. "Many of my students have already registered in the Olympiad and I look forward to seeing some of them reaching the finals. It is a very good way to engage today's youth," he says.

" The Daily Star has been actively involved in launching campaigns and events that empower, educate and inspire the youth of Bangladesh," says Md Tajdin Hassan, Chief Strategy and Digital Transformation Officer, The Daily Star. "This Olympiad is one such example. We are thrilled to see more than 3,000 registrations from different corners of the country. We are grateful to efood for their relentless support and contribution in making this a true success. We hope that this event will help the youth become better and more responsible citizens, by embracing the values, morals, and resilience that our Liberation War continues to teach us."

Register for the competition here: http://campaign.thedailystar.net/dsolympiad/
