Celebration of International Mother Language Day in Turkey
2021-02-22T19:08:14+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/events/news/celebration-international-mother-language-day-turkey-2049313

Yesterday on February 21, the Bangladesh Embassy of Turkey in Ankara celebrated International Mother Language Day through various events. Led by the Bangladesh Ambassador to Turkey, Masood Mannan, NDC, the embassy staff and expatriate Bangladeshis hoisted the national flag and laid a wreath at the newly constructed Shaheed Minar at the embassy premises, in the early hours of Ekushey February.

On the occasion of International Mother Language Day and Martyrs' Day, a discussion meeting and cultural program was organised in the auditorium of the embassy. According to a press release, at the beginning of the ceremony, a minute of silence was observed in memory of the great language martyrs.

Md Abul Bashar, a personal officer, also offered special prayers for the forgiveness of the departed souls and the welfare of the nation. On the occasion of the day, His Excellency President Md Abdul Hamid, Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, Hon'ble Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr A K Abdul Momen and Hon'ble Minister of State for External Affairs Md Shahriar Alam's speeches were read by Hon'ble Ambassador, Masood Mannan, NDC, Defense Advisor Brigadier General and Brigadier General, embassy Head, Md Rais Hasan Sarwar. Everyone spontaneously took part in the commemorative discussion at the event.

At the outset of his speech, the Ambassador paid his deepest respects and condolences to all the martyrs of February 21, 1952. He said the historical language movement was rooted in the Bengali independence movement, which resulted in the emergence of an independent sovereign state called Bangladesh on the world map in 1971 by a long journey. He also recalled the active contribution of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in the language movement. The Ambassador further said that the consciousness of February 21 is not only a part of the Bengali culture, but also an indestructible consciousness of the diverse culture of the world in the establishment of the status of mother tongue. In order to spread this awareness in the hearts of the people all over the world, in 1999, UNESCO recognized February 21 as the International Mother Language Day. He also lauded the diligent and timely leadership of Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in attaining this recognition.

All the officials and employees of the embassy and their family members and expatriate Bangladeshis were present at the cultural program. At the end of the pleasant ceremony, the Ambassador and his wife gave gifts to the children. The event was organized in accordance with hygiene and social distance to prevent Covid-19 infection.

In the afternoon, on the occasion of Martyrs' Day and International Mother Language Day, a special poetry recitation program was organized by the embassy with the participation of the ambassadors of about  30 countries and heads of international organizations, including the UNESCO Commission of Russia, India and Turkey. The Embassy has published a special leaflet in Turkish-English on the occasion of Immortal Ekushey and International Mother Language Day.
