Yahya opts for tougher line
2021-03-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/yahya-opts-tougher-line-2055685

March 6, 1971

YAHYA'S RADIO SPEECH

Yahya Khan's speech was broadcast on Radio Pakistan on March 6, 1971. It was provocative and offensive. Yahya blamed Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Awami League for the deteriorating situation in East Pakistan and attributed the non-cooperation movement to the act of a handful of people who were trying to "destroy the homeland of millions of innocent Pakistanis".

The threat underlying Yahya's speech was clear: "No matter what happens, as long as I am in command of the Pakistan armed forces and head of the state, I will ensure complete and absolute integrity of Pakistan… I will not allow a handful of people to destroy the homeland of millions of innocent Pakistanis. It is the duty of the Pakistan armed forces to ensure the integrity, solidarity and security of Pakistan, a duty in which they have never failed."

Yahya, according to American Consul General Archer K Blood then posted in Dhaka, gave a pretty unequivocal answer to the question of how would the army would react on the occasion of unilateral declaration of independence by Bangabandhu at the mass rally called for March 7.

Yahya's implied threat brought the following assessment from the US State Department: "While it seems clear to us here that the use of armed force in East Pakistan could not be effective in maintaining the unity of the country and could only result in bloodshed and turmoil, which the longer prolonged would be most adverse to our interests and thus should be discouraged, we do not feel that diplomatic approach on our part is likely to dissuade Yahya if he is determined on such a course. We are also concerned that such approach could later be used by Yahya, Bhutto and other West Pakistanis to blame us for breakup of country. It would thus inhibit our ability to maintain effective relationship with them in the future. We are discussing various contingencies with [the] British in Washington today to determine whether, in event of military action, British might be willing to take lead in interceding with Yahya." [Archer K Blood, The Cruel Birth of Bangladesh, UPL 2006, pg. 172]

Yahya also announced in the speech that the inaugural session of the National Assembly would take place on March 25, 1971.

Earlier in the day, a meeting of the members of the Awami League Working Committee had been called at the residence of Bangabandhu to decide the party's stance at the Racecourse meeting on March 7. On the conclusion of the radio broadcast, Bangabandhu adjourned the meeting till late that evening where Awami League would decide their response to Yahya's speech. The evening meeting was attended by Bangabandhu, Tajuddin Ahmad, Syed Nazrul Islam, Khandaker Mushtaque Ahmed, Capt. Mansur Ali, AHM Kamruzzaman and Dr Kamal Hossain.

TIKKA KHAN APPOINTED GOVERNOR

The appointment of Tikka Khan as the governor of East Pakistan was officially announced on March 6, 1971. Referring to this appointment, Rehman Sobhan wrote in the March 6, 1971 issue of Forum, "Bangladesh's demands were now confronted with the language of weapons as one of the reputedly most hawkish elements in the power elite was pulled in as governor to replace Admiral Ahsan, who had refused to carry the responsibility for the consequences of the postponement any longer." [Rehman Sobhan, Forum, March 6, 1971]

PEACEFUL STRIKE CONTINUES

Into the fifth day of the non-cooperation movement, a peaceful strike was being observed in Dhaka. Processions were brought out in Dhaka and Narayanganj.

Around 11:00am, 321 prisoners broke out of the central jail in Dhaka to escape. Seven were shot dead and 30 injured.

A group of senior civil servants, led by Sanaul Haque, called on Bangabandhu and formally declared their allegiance to comply with the directives of the Awami League.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
