Tikka Khan refused oath
2021-03-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/tikka-khan-refused-oath-2056593

March 8, 1971

TIKKA KHAN REFUSED THE OATH OF OFFICE

Tikka Khan was handed over responsibilities of both the governor and martial law administrations in East Pakistan. He was also the commander of Eastern Command. However, the all-powerful governor could not find a judge to swear him in as Justice BA Siddiqui, chief justice of the East Pakistan High Court, refused to administer the oath for "reasons of ill health".

The martial law officer in Dhaka tried to make alternative arrangements but failed. According to the president's legal parchment, the swearing in ceremony must be administered by the chief justice of the concerned province. His nominee or a local judge of the Supreme Court cannot perform the task. General Tikka himself rang up the chief secretary of East Pakistan, Shafiul Azam, to arrange the ceremony but he also refused. [Siddiq Salik, Witness to Surrender, UPL 1997, pp.55-56]

This was powerful evidence of the success of the non-cooperation movement and the disassociation of the Bangalee public from military rule. [Richard Sisson and Leo E Rose, War and Secession: Pakistan, India, and the Creation of Bangladesh, UCP, 1990, pg. 102]

NEW AL DIRECTIVES

Awami League, virtually in control of East Pakistan, issued some new directives authorising banking transactions for the purchase of industrial raw materials for running of mills and also for bona fide personal withdrawals of up to 1,000 rupees. Relevant government offices were directed to remain open for the purpose of supplying fertiliser and fuel to power pumps.

GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES PLEDGE ALLEGIANCE TO AL

During the non-cooperation movement the whole government machinery in East Pakistan was in liaison with the Awami League to ensure a modicum of continuity in their day-to-day functioning. Ninety-eight representatives of the Coordination Council of Associations-Unions of the Public Employees of Pakistan, after an emergency meeting on March 8, issued a press release formally pledging their allegiance to Awami League.

The radio station in Dhaka began broadcasting at 8:30am by airing Bangabandhu's March 7 rally's speech. Other stations in the then East Pakistan followed suit.

Citing a member of the Indian diplomatic mission in Dhaka, a New York Times report said, "Gandhi at the height of his popularity during the struggle against British rule in India was never able to get more than 1 or 2 per cent of Government workers to go out on strike. Here every body has quit." [ The Political Tidal Wave That Struck East Pakistan, May 2, 1971]

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
