Bangabandhu’s appeal to U Thant
2021-03-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bangabandhus-appeal-u-thant-2057937

March 10, 1971

'PREVENT THE THREAT OF GENOCIDE'

In a press statement issued on March 10, 1971, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman urged the UN Secretary General to take action to avert the threat of genocide in East Pakistan. Referring to UN Secretary General U Thant's approval of withdrawal of UN employees from East Pakistan, Bangabandhu said the Secretary General could not ignore his responsibility of protecting the human rights of the 70 million Bangalees. In that case it would be a clear violation of the UN human rights mandate, he added.

BANGABANDHU'S MESSAGE TO BLOOD

Archer K. Blood, the American consul general in Dhaka, writes in his memoir that on March 10, 1971, Bangabandhu sent a message to him via Alamgir Rahman, who informed that Mujib was greatly relieved at the news of Yahya's coming to Dhaka for a discussion. Bangabandhu wanted very much to work out with Yahya some political settlement that would avoid bloodshed, satisfy Bangalee aspirations and preserve some vestige of a link with Pakistan, writes Blood.

Bangabandhu asked, informed Alamgir, "Does the United States want to see a military confrontation with the prospect of an eventual Communist domination of Bengal or would it prefer a political solution to the crisis?"

Blood replied that the question was easy to answer: peaceful political solution in lieu of bloodshed.

Then the messenger said that Bangabandhu wanted to know if the United States would be willing to indicate to Yahya the hopes of a political solution to the ongoing crisis. The American consul general replied in the positive and assured that he would undertake to suggest to the US Ambassador in Pakistan, Farland, to inform Yahya about it before the latter's departure for Dhaka. [Archer K Blood, The Cruel Birth of Bangladesh, UPL, 2006, pp. 185-186]

WEST PAKISTANI LEADERS'

SUPPORT FOR BANGABANDHU'S

4-POINT DEMAND

In a meeting called by Nawabjada Nasrullah Khan, former chief of PDM, on March 10, 1971 in Lahore several leaders from West Pakistan proclaimed their support for Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's four demands. They urged for immediate opening of the National Assembly session.

Mir Ghaus Bakhsh Bizenjo, general secretary of NAP (Wali) and a prominent leader form Balochistan, said in a statement issued today that Bangabandhu's proposal reflected the aspirations of the people of  Punjab, Sindh, North West Frontier Province and Balochistan also. There was no scope of terming the proposal as inimical to the national interest of Pakistan, he added.

In a press statement, President of the Council Muslim League Mia Mumtaz Doultana urged President Yahya khan to visit East Pakistan immediately and hold discussions with Bangabandhu to put an end to the misunderstandings created following the postponement of the National Assembly session. He also urged for immediate withdrawal of military rule and handing over power to the elected representatives.

NAP Chief Khan Abdul Wali Khan in a press conference held today in Karachi said if they don't attend the Assembly it would mean that they are supporting those who are unwilling to hand over power to the elected representatives of the people. He informed that he would visit Dhaka on March 13, 1971 to discuss the political situation with Bangabandhu.

The smaller parties of West Pakistan were converging on a strategy of supporting the Awami League, which made Bhutto's People's Party politically isolated by mid-March of 1971.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
