Bhutto’s telegram to Bangabandhu
2021-03-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bhuttos-telegram-bangabandhu-2058465

March 11, 1971

BHUTTO'S TELEGRAM

In a telegram sent to Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on March 11, 1971, Bhutto expressed his willingness to come to Dhaka immediately to work out a solution so that the National Assembly session could be held soon. He urged Bangabandhu to work together to build a "new system" where there would be no discrimination among provinces as well as among citizens.

KEEP ECONOMY IN FULL GEAR

Tajuddin Ahmad, general secretary of the Awami League, in a statement today said the people's movement had attained unprecedent heights. It had been made possible because every person in his own sphere had taken it as his sacred duty to implement, in spirit and in substance, all the directives of Bangabandhu issued in the name of the people of "Bangladesh", he added. He urged people to be prepared to foil the conspiracy of the vested interests and the anti-people forces to destroy the economy of "Bangladesh". The statement called upon people engaged in various economic activities to follow rigorous discipline in every respect for the victory of the people's cause.

The statement also contained several directives for government and non-government organisations. The ports were allowed to operate their regular activities but non-cooperation would be extended for mobilisation of forces or for materials which might be utilised for repression of the people.

The execution of flood control, town protection and water development works were permitted to carry on. It was also directed that interest-free loans be distributed in cyclone-affected areas.

US DIPLOMATIC CABLE

In accordance with Bangabandhu's request for a political solution, the American consul general in Dhaka sent the following assessment to the US Embassy in Pakistan and the State Department on March 11, 1971: "In our view the political crisis has moved well beyond the LFO and National Assembly discussion of a Six Point Constitution. The election result itself doomed this possibility by, first of all, affording the Awami League the unexpected majority by which to ram through a constitution of its making and, secondly, by cutting Bhutto out of any role greater than Chief Minister of Punjab or leader of the opposition in the National Assembly. What is needed now is a solution which will give something to Bhutto, something to Mujib, something to Yahya and the Army, still preserve at least a vestige of the unity of Pakistan, and hopefully buy time for a cooling of passion."

The EXDIS telegram by Blood suggested "Confederation" as a possible arrangement under which Bhutto could become prime minister of West Pakistan, Bangabandhu the prime minister of Bangladesh (Blood wrote that East Pakistan had become a term for geographers) and Yahya the president of the Confederation of Pakistan. He further suggested that the Pakistan armed forces could, as before, draw sustenance from both wings and be stationed in both wings.

The state department replied that the endorsement of a political solution could readily be construed by Yahya as support for East Pakistan's separation. They further commented that Yahya's visit to Dhaka provided the best opportunity to salvage the union of the two wings of Pakistan. The state department chose to maintain its posture of non-involvement. [Archer K Blood, The Cruel Birth of Bangladesh, UPL, 2006, pp. 186-87]

NON-COOPERATION MOVEMENT CONTINUES

The non-cooperation movement was gaining momentum day by day. East Pakistan was literally run under the direct orders of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Air Marshal (Retd) Asghar Khan said in in a press conference today that during his weeklong stay in East Pakistan he did not see the Pakistani flag anywhere except the martial law office in Kurmitola.

On the premises of Bindubashini High School in Tangail, National Awami Party leader Maulana Bhashani at a mass rally said Bangabandhu is the leader of seven crore people and asked the people to follow his instructions.

Swadhin Bangladesh Kendrio Chattro Sangram Parished, led by Nur-e-Alam Siddiqui, Abdul Quddus Makhan, ASM Abdur Rab and Shahjahan Siraj , urged people to renounce all titles and medal awarded by the Pakistani government. They also called upon people not to provide any support in the movement of military convoys across the country.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
