Bhutto cornered
2021-03-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bhutto-cornered-2059589

March 13, 1971

BANGABANDHU'S 4 DEMANDS FIND SUPPORT IN BOTH WINGS

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's demands received wide approval in both wings of Pakistan. Even smaller parties from West Pakistan came out in support of Awami League. A meeting called by Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam was held today in Karachi where leaders of Muslim Leagues, Jamaat-i-Islami and Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan attended.

The leaders of the West Pakistani parties supported Bangabandhu's four demands and called for interim governments to be established in both the centre and provinces. They criticised Bhutto's insistence on prior agreement on constitutional matters, and declared that Bangabandhu had given the "clearest assurance" that the majority party would be responsive to suggestions. They also called on Yahya to meet Bangabandhu and clear up "misunderstandings, apprehensions and suspicions". [Srinath Raghavan, 1971: A Global History of the Creation of Bangladesh, Permanent Black 2013, pg. 46]

The leader of the National Awami Party Khan Abdul Wali Khan today arrived Dhaka. He, in an interview with journalists at the airport, expressed his full support for the demands of Bangabandhu. He further said the present crisis had taken such a turn that it could endanger the unity of Pakistan. The NAP chief demanded immediate withdrawal of the military power and handing over power to the elected representatives of the people.

Bhutto was increasingly being isolated because of the growing support for Bangabandhu's demands from both wings.

'TEETERING ON THE BRINK'

The Economist, on March 13, 1971, wrote in article titled Teetering on the brink that martial law was pushing East Pakistan towards declaring independence -- unless Bangabandhu got the substance of full autonomy.

Commenting on the upcoming visit of Yahya Khan, the paper said the only realistic course for the president seemed to be to acknowledge that in the new situation only Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was preventing an outright declaration of independence, and to do a deal with him while he is still in control.

Comparing the situation to the one in Biafra where Britain supplied the Nigerian government with arms to crush the secession, Economist indicated that no British government would wish to get involved in a civil war in Pakistan. They presented the following reasons for the different response: "East Pakistan is a territory whose frontiers already exist. Sheikh Mujib has demonstrably wider support there than General Ojukwu had in the territory claimed for Biafra. The 70 million East Bengalis, culturally distinct from their western partners, not only constitute a nation that qualifies for self- determination by present standards, but actually represent the majority of Pakistan's whole population."

CIVILIAN STAFF OF DEFENCE ORDERED TO JOIN DUTY

A martial law order issued by the headquarters of the Martial Law Administrator Zone 'B' today asked all civil employees in East Pakistan to resume their duties. The order came with the warning that those who fail to follow it would not only be dismissed but be tried as an absconder.

Sheikh Mujibur Rahman gave a statement in this regard saying that because the Bangalees were fighting against military rule, such a military order would prove to be provocative. He further said the people were no longer afraid of such threat as they were now determined to reach their goal of freedom.

PREVENT CAPITAL FLIGHT

Swadhin Bangla Sangram Parishad today issued a directive asking people not to buy shops, houses or any other properties deserted by West Pakistanis and thus prevent capital flight from Bangladesh to West Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
