Will Bangabandhu call on Yahya?
2021-03-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/will-bangabandhu-call-yahya-2059053

March 12, 1971

YAHYA'S DHAKA VISIT ANNOUNCED

BBC today reported that Pakistan President Yahya Khan would visit Dhaka soon with a "package deal" to resolve the ongoing crisis in East Pakistan. The report also indicated a handover of power to elected representatives before the commencement of the National Assembly session.

Kamal Hossain in his memoir shares that around March 12, 1971, a senior military officer arrived from Rawalpindi and wanted to see Tajuddin Ahmed. Kamal Hossain reported it to Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, who asked him to see the officer. The officer asked whether Bangabandhu would see Yahya if the president were to come to Dhaka and whether the meeting could be held at the president's house. The reason behind the second question was that earlier Bangabandhu had refused to meet Tikka Khan at both Government House and the cantonment. Bangabandhu had said that if Tikka Khan wanted to see him he should call on him at his residence. Kamal Hossain immediately reported to Bangabandhu, who directed that the officer should be informed that if Yahya came to Dhaka, Bangabandhu would see him and that the venue of the meeting could the president's house, although Yahya was quite welcome to visit him at his residence. [Kamal Hossain, Bangladesh: Quest for Freedom and Justice, UPL, 2013, pg.91]

THE MILITARY BUILD-UP CONTINUES

The fly-in of troops from West Pakistan into Dhaka continued in the early days of March, 1971. PIA's fleet of Boeings flew the troops in. Due to India's embargo on over-flights all Pakistani aircraft had to take a detour via Sri Lanka. The 9 Division from Quetta, under Major General Nazar Hussain Shah, and 17 Division from Kharian under Major General Shaukat Riza, were being flown in.

Khadim Hussain Raza, then general officer commanding 14 Division in East Pakistan, writes in his memoir that at the beginning of Tikka Khan's induction (March 6, 1971) as head of the Eastern Command the president's policy stipulated that the troops had to be confined to the cantonments and nothing was to be done to provoke an incident. [Khadim Hussain Raja, A Stranger in My Own Country, UPL, 2012, pg. 67]

East Pakistani leaders, including Bangabandhu and Bhashani, continued to protest the military build-up. They called upon people not to provide any support in the movement of military convoys across the country. In some cases, there were active resistance against such strengthening of armed forces. In Chittagong, for example, workers, taking their own initiative, suspended unloading of MV Swat that carried the first reinforcements from West Pakistan.

The military buildup in East Pakistan was seen by Indians as a tactic to cower the Bangalees into diluting their demands. [Srinath Raghavan, 1971: A Global History of the Creation of Bangladesh, Permanent Black, 2013, pg. 58]

SANGRAM PARISHAD DIRECTIVES

Swadhin Bangladesh Kendrio Chattro Sangram Parishad, in a statement issued today, warned hoarders, smugglers and conspirators of stern action if they don't desist from their evil-mongering immediately. They also directed oil suppliers not to provide oil to those who were conspiring against the liberation struggle of Bangladesh.

National Assembly member Jahiruddin today renounced his title 'Hilal-i-Quaid-i-Azam' in response to the call of Chhatra Sangram Parishad.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
