Govt planning to build 30,000 homes for freedom fighters
2021-03-14T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/editorial/news/govt-planning-build-30000-homes-freedom-fighters-2059965

We warmly welcome the government's plan to build 30,000 homes for those of our valiant freedom fighters who are insolvent, and for the families of deceased and martyred war heroes. The Liberation War affairs ministry plans to implement this project (aptly named Bir Nibash) by June 2023. Last month, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina also announced that the minimum monthly allowance for freedom fighters would be raised from Tk 12,000 to Tk 20,000.

Although it is yet to be presented to and approved by the Executive Committee of the National Economic Council, we believe this project to be a most ideal gift from the PM to mark the birth centenary of the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman—as well as the golden jubilee of the independence of Bangladesh.

Most of those who fought for our nation in the Liberation War of 1971 are well into their sixties and seventies, and government assistance such as this is necessary for them, now more than ever. Not to mention, it is crucial that the nation pays tribute to them for their contributions, not just in words, but by ensuring that they and/or their families are not living in need, without the most basic requirement of shelter being met.

However, we must also caution the concerned authorities to ensure that only those who truly fought for our freedom are benefitted from this housing project, and that anyone posing as a freedom fighter does not get an unfair allocation through this initiative.

In the past, there have been numerous examples of individuals (whose freedom fighter status was not verified by the Jatiyo Muktijoddha Council) reaping the rewards meant for our valiant war heroes. No doubt, this is gravely unjust but more importantly, such instances could also be depriving true freedom fighters from the respect and resources that they are owed and are often in dire need of.

Therefore, while we congratulate the government on planning for the Bir Nibash housing project and the incrementation of the minimum monthly allowance for freedom fighters, we also hope that the distribution of this aid will be conducted most fairly and with the highest level of transparency and accountability.
