Liberation War Museum begins celebrations for their 25th anniversary
2021-03-14T13:52:40+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/liberation-war-museum-begins-celebrations-their-25th-anniversary-2060337

On the occasion of Bangladesh's 50th year of independence and Liberation War Museum's 25th anniversary on March 22, the museum committee has arranged a series of celebrations this month. They announced their schedule at a press conference held at the Dhaka Reporter's Unity yesterday.

Liberation War Museum Trustee and Member Secretary Sara Zaker, singer Maqsoodul Haque, and Liberation War Museum Programme Coordinator Rafiqul Islam among others, spoke at the event.

The celebrations began on March 7, commemorating Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's historical speech. Hundreds of children participated by drawing murals at the museum premises on the day. Dr Helen Jarvis, an Australian-Cambodian historian gave a speech on the significance of UNESCO's 'Memory of the World' recognition. Bangabandhu's historic speech recently was recognised as a 'Memory of the World.' She also inaugurated the month-long exhibition, "Bissho Jure Dhonito Protidhonito Bhashon." The opening day also featured a discussion session, 'The Struggle this Time is the Struggle for our Emancipation'.

On March 12, an international summit was arranged virtually with the participation from 77 speakers from 27 countries across the globe. The summit, 'Commemorating Past Genocide and Learning to Prevent Atrocity Crimes' was arranged in association with 19 international organisations.

The Liberation War Museum has arranged a three-day virtual music festival, "Muktir Joygan" from March 14-16. Warfaze, Obscure, Joler Gan, Nemesis, Bangla Five, Meghdol and Spandan along with other bands, are set to perform at the fest.

A special programme will be held, marking Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's birth centenary on March 17. The museum will arrange an alpana drawing programme in association with the University of Development Alternative's Fine Arts Department on March 21.

A special programme will be arranged at the museum on March 25, commemorating their silver jubilee. A  two-day programme will also be arranged at Mirpur Jalladkhana on March 25-26. The museum will arrange a march from the Central Shaheed Minar to the National Monument on March 26.
