Bhutto faces mass opposition in Dhaka
2021-03-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bhutto-faces-mass-opposition-dhaka-2063997

March 21, 1971

MUJIB-YAHYA UNSCHEDULED MEETING

In an unscheduled meeting, Yahya today told Mujib and Tajuddin that Bhutto had been informed that the representatives of the Awami League and the government had reached an agreement on the formation of central cabinet and that Bhutto should be present for discussion on the interim constitutional instrument and cabinet formation. Mujib in reply told that if Bhutto were going to become a part of the discussion, the AL no longer wanted a cabinet at the national level. However, Bhutto's involvement in the appointment of a council of presidential advisers would be acceptable, added Mujib. He also indicated that Bhutto's participation in the cabinet formation would be an insurmountable obstacle given the extreme opposition in the AL to his being a part of the government. The AL leaders also remained skeptical about the relationship between Bhutto and the martial law authority. [ [Richard Sisson and Leo E Rose, War and Secession: Pakistan, India, and the Creation of Bangladesh, UCP, 1990, pg. 120]

BHUTTO ARRIVES, MEETS YAHYA

Bhutto and his advisers arrived Dhaka today. The entourage was met by a police escort who were wearing black arm bands in protest of the killings of civilians in East Pakistan. Processions were brought out in protest of his visit. Some placards of the protesters read: Bhutto killer of people. The Bhutto delegation was taken to Hotel Intercontinental under heavy military guard. At the hotel they also faced non-cooperation from workers.

Shortly after his arrival Bhutto met Yahya who briefed him about the ongoing negotiations. Bhutto's reaction, in his own words, was: "I acquainted my colleagues with the two-committee proposal. They expressed their misgivings and suggested that I should not accept the proposal as it contained seeds of two Pakistans… We also agreed that [the scheme] had to be put to and approved by the full knowledge of the people. Two or more political leaders could not ignore the existence of the entire assembly vested with constitutional and legislative power." [ Siddiq Salik, Witness to Surrender, UPL, 1997, pg. 167]

Bhutto expressed his opposition to the AL's position on the issues of aid and trade. He also sought time to discuss other issues with his advisers.

Yahya told Bhutto to be present at tomorrow's meeting if he wanted to meet Mujib.

BROHI CALLS ON MUJIB

Eminent Pakistani law expert AK Brohi today called on Bangabandhu at his residence. He presented his written opinion to the AL chief where he commented that there was no legal barrier to the withdrawal of martial law and the formation of an interim government before framing the constitution. Formation of an interim government in participation of the elected representatives would rather ensure popular support to the decision, he added.

Bangabandhu, speaking today at a gathering in front of his house, urged people to continue their peaceful and non-violent movement until the rights of the 70 million people of "Bangla Desh" were established. Swadhin Bangladesh Kendrio Chattro Sangram Parishad, in a statement issued today, urged people to observe the Pakistan Day (March 23) as Protirodh Dibos (resistance day).

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
