Bangabandhu sees progress in Dhaka talks
2021-03-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bangabandhu-sees-progress-dhaka-talks-2063561

March 20, 1971

PROGRESS IN TALKS

The fourth round of talks between Yahya Khan and Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was held today. Bangabandhu was joined by his colleagues -- Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed, Khondokar Moshtaque Ahmed, M Mansur Ali and Kamal Hossain.

The meeting began with a heated debate where Bangabandhu brought up the military attack on civilians in Joydebpur. Yahya claimed that it was the Bangalees' fault the attack took place, because they had blocked the movement of troops.

In his response, Bangabandhu suggested that in such a volatile time, the army must stay in their barracks.

However, after emerging from the meeting, Bangabandhu reported "some progress". It was the first time he himself said that progress had been made. He, however, remained secretive about what formulas were being discussed to meet his demands. He informed that he would meet with the president again on March 22, 1971.

Nineteen days into the non-cooperation movement in East Pakistan, peaceful protests continued. Bangabandhu in a press statement today urged all to continue the movement in a disciplined and peaceful manner until freedom was achieved.

BHUTTO'S ABOUT-TURN

Following the Mujib-Yahya talk Bhutto said today in Karachi that he had received clarifications that he had requested from the president concerning his role in the negotiations. He indicated that he would discuss with the president and Sheikh Mujib the participation of his Pakistan People's Party in an interim government. He also informed that he and a team of constitutional and economic experts would depart for next day.

Earlier Bhutto had rejected the president's invitation to come to Dhaka. In his memoir Bhutto recalled that Yahya has sent him a message on the night of March 16 to come to Dhaka on March 19. He replied that he would come if he could negotiate face to face with Bangabandhu. He requested a response from the president in this regard.

On March 18, he received another message from General Peerzada, the president's principal staff officer, to join the Dhaka talk. Bhutto again refused. However, as the discussions appeared to take significant turn with the president's economic advisers being summoned to Dhaka, Bhutto changed his position. He wired the president that his party, PPP, could in no way be left out of a governing coalition, be it interim or permanent. On the evening of March 19 he received a message from Yahya indicating that Bangabandhu was prepared to discuss things. [Richard Sisson and Leo E Rose, War and Secession: Pakistan, India, and the Creation of Bangladesh, UCP, 1990, pp. 119-120]

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
