Dhaka talks at a crucial stage
2021-03-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/dhaka-talks-crucial-stage-2063121

March 19, 1971

'TALKS WILL CONTINUE'

The fateful talks between President Yahya Khan and the Awami League Chief, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, were resumed at the President's House today. The dialogue lasted 90 minutes. Bangabandhu reiterated his demands for the withdrawal of martial law and transfer of power to the elected representatives.

Bangabandhu emerged from the discussion with President Yahya beaming and in good spirits to report that talks with the president would continue and his advisers would meet tonight with the president's aides to try to work out a "formula". He further informed that tomorrow morning he and six of his party leaders and advisers would meet with the president and his advisers.

He further said Awami League's stand (vis-a-vis constitution-making) was clear and the whole world knew why the people of Bengal had made sacrifices. He, however, pointed out that it was not an easy problem and sufficient time was needed to solve it.

Later in the evening three advisers of the Awami League chief had a meeting with the advisers of the president.

On the 18th day of the non-cooperation movement, most of the schools, private offices and institutions remained closed in East Pakistan, now Bangladesh. Black flags were hoisted atop houses and offices.

FIRING AT JOYDEBPUR

Curfew was imposed this evening in Joydebpur town following a clash between the local people and the army personnel, which resulted in the deaths of at least three persons.

The problem was triggered when locals of East Pakistan put up a barricade on the road to prevent a military commander from returning to Dhaka, who had earlier travelled to Joydebpur. The news of the attack angered the people of Dhaka. They immediately brought out spontaneous processions in the city.

Bangabandhu strongly condemned tonight the firing on the unarmed people at Joydebpur. Talking to newsmen, he said, "If they think they can suppress people's struggle by bullet and force, they simply live in a fool's paradise."

The Awami League chief said he wondered how the army could go to the Joydebpur Bazar when martial law authorities had stated that troops had already been withdrawn to the barracks.

'HANDOVER POWER TO BANGABANDHU'

NAP (Bhashani) Chief Maulana Bhashani today urged Yahya to immediately hand over power to the leader of the majority party, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. This is the only solution left to keep the two wings united, he added. Speaking at a meeting with journalists in Chittagong the Maulana said if Yahya didn't accept this proposal Bangabandhu should immediately declare independence.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
