“Inauguration Ceremony of the Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner and Launching of NSU Research Excellent Award 2021” held at North South University
2021-03-21T13:01:20+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/pr/news/inauguration-ceremony-the-bangabandhu-and-liberation-war-corner-and-launching-nsu-research-excellent-2064305

The first private university and the number one ranked private university of Bangladesh, North South University (NSU) organized "Inauguration Ceremony of the Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner at NSU Central Library and Launching of NSU Research Excellent Award 2021" in part of the birth centenary celebration of greatest Bengali of all time, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on 18 March (Thursday) 2021.

As part of the national celebrations of the centenary of the birthday of Bangladesh's founding father, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, North South University has taken many glorious initiatives. This new section (Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner at NSU Central Library) has an impressive collection of books, archival materials, and pictures on Bangabandhu as well as the great liberation war. NSU is one of the most research-active universities in Bangladesh. To further encourage research, NSU has established awards for the top three researchers in each of four schools. Through a rigorous process of assessment, NSU has selected the winners of these research awards (gold medals and cash prizes). NSU is publishing a book on the life of Father of the nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. NSU is the proud knowledge partner of 100 days long "Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Quiz" organized by the Education ministry & University Grant Commission. NSU made souvenir pen with the picture of Bangabandhu marking the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Centenary to distribute among internal and external stakeholders.

Architect Yeafesh Osman, Hon'ble Minister, Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh was present as the Chief Guest. Former President, FBCCI, Mr. M. A. Kashem, Founder Chairman & Director, Southeast Bank and Chairman, Board of Trustees (BoT), North South University was present as the Special Guest. Freedom Fighter Lion Mr. Benajir Ahmed, Ms. Rehana Rahman, Mr. Aziz AI Kaiser and Mr. Tanveer Harun, Members, BoT, NSU were present. Professor Atiqul Islam, Vice-Chancellor, NSU chaired the session. The program was moderated by Mr. Jamil Ahmed, TV Presenter & Director - Public Relations Office at North South University (NSU). The Program was broadcasted live on North South University's Official Facebook page and YouTube Channel.

Speaking as the Chief Guest, Hon'ble Minister, Architect Yeafesh Osman, said, "I myself was a front-line freedom fighter, those of us who went to the war of liberation, what we wanted was for our next generation to take Bangladesh to the world with a new identity proudly. I am overwhelmed when I come to North South University today, if we don't know the history of the country we can be miss leaded, we have to study history, and if we want to study the history of Bangladesh then it is not possible without studying about Bangabandhu and that is what North South University did." He thanked the NSU authorities for inaugurating the NSU's Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner and for taking the initiative to pass on the history of Bangabandhu and the Liberation War to the new generation. At the same time, he mentioned the progress and development of Bangladesh using digital technologies. In the second part of the program, he mentioned providing Research Excellent Award among the researchers is a great initiative to encourage research work. He also mentioned, other universities may follow this practice as role model.

Speaking as the Special Guest, Chairman, Board of Trustees (BoT), NSU, Mr. M. A. Kashem said, Our deepest respects and best wishes on the birth centenary of the father of the nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was the great hero of the liberation war of 1971. He was the embodiment of our freedom. He led the democratic movement from the language movement of 1952 to the coup d'état of 1969 and he declared the freedom of this country on March 26, 1971. He is not only a leader but also one of the greatest politicians of this subcontinent. This man was equal to the Himalayas in personality and courage. People of our country has high expectations from Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, daughter of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. To meet these expectations, she is working tirelessly to meet these expectations. At this time, he announced the auspicious inauguration of "Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner". He also added that, NSU believes that teaching and research are inextricably linked. All the major universities of the world have given equal importance to research along with education. Following in his footsteps, North South University has inaugurated the NSU Research Excellent Award 2021 in Research. So that teachers be some more motivated in research. During this time he mentioned, "We are the first private university to take this type of initiative to provide prizes among researchers to encourage research," he added. I think others will be inspired to see us. He also mentioned that North South University has taken initiative to publish a book on Bangabandhu and the book will be published soon.

Freedom Fighter Lion Mr. Benajir Ahmed said, "We are happy to have inaugurated "Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner" at the Central Library within the mujib borsho. In the second part of the program, he said awarding honorary teachers for their special contribution in research will encourage researchers to concentrate on such research work in future.

Vice-Chancellor, NSU, Professor Atiqul Islam said, "We are sincerely trying to teach the new generation about the life of Bangabandhu, his life philosophy, political thought, social thought, and all the struggles of his life, whether it is through pictures, books or information, we will pass it on to the next generation. During this time, he also mentioned, for this reason, we have inaugurated Bangabandhu and Liberation War Corner at North South University. He further added that the inauguration of Research Excellent Award 2021 to give award to researchers for their outstanding contribution in research will encourage teachers to do more research in future.

Among others, Dr. M. Ismail Hossain, Pro Vice-Chancellor, NSU, Professor and Former Treasurer,  Dr. Gour Gobinda Goswami, Director, Office of Student Affairs, Dr. Norman Kenneth Swazo, Director, Office of Research, Prof. Abdul Hannan Chowdhury, Dean, School of Business & Economics, Prof. Dr. Javed Bari, Dean, School of Engineering & Physical Sciences, Prof. Dr. Hasan Mahmud Reza, Acting Dean, School of Health & Life Sciences, Prof. Dr. Abdur Rob Khan, Dean, School of Humanities & Social Sciences, Faculties, Officials, Students and Media Persons were also present in the program.
