‘Let’s hope for the best and prepare for the worst’
2021-03-23T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/lets-hope-the-best-and-prepare-the-worst-2065125

March 23, 1971

A DILATORY TACTIC

The representatives of President Yahya Khan and an Awami League team met twice today. The AL team arrived at the President's House flying the Bangladesh flag -- a sight which clearly disturbed the junta. However, an agreement on the implementation of the principles embodied in the Six Points was ultimately achieved.

MM Ahmed, economic adviser to Yahya, agreed that the Six Points scheme could be given effect with minor adaptations. He also showed some flexibility with regards to foreign trade and aid.

Lt Gen Peerzada, principal staff officer to Yahya Khan, proposed further meetings on several issues. In hindsight it can be said that the military junta was prolonging the discussion only to consume time and to provide a cover for the preparation of the "military solution".

Meanwhile, Yahya Khan spent the day not at the President's House but in the cantonment instead, where formal preparations for a military strike against the rebellious province were being given its final shape.

Zulfikar Ali Bhutto spent almost the whole day in his hotel room examining with his party men the terms of the broad agreement and understanding reached between Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and President Yahya Khan.

BANGABANDHU MEETS WEST WING LEADERS

Five West Wing leaders representing smaller parties met the Awami League Chief, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, jointly and later called on the President at the President's House. The five leaders are: Mian Mumtaz Daultana, President, Council Muslim League; Khan Abdul Wali Khan, President, NAP; Maulana Mufti Mahmood, General Secretary, Jamiatul Ulema-e-Pakistan; Maulana Siiah Ahmed Noorani and Sardar Shaukat Hayat Khan.

After their meeting with Bangabandhu, Mian Mumtaz Daultana said they did not discuss any particular proposal. Asked how long the dialogue would continue, Mian Saheb said, "We like that everything should be over in matter of minutes for the betterment of the country."

He was hopeful about the talks. Interjecting at this stage, Bangabandhu said: "Let us hope for the best and remain prepared for the worst."

RESISTANCE DAY OBSERVED

Today was Pakistan's Republic Day. But the situation was totally different in East Pakistan. The day was observed as Protirodh Dibos (Resistance day). The whole city of Dhaka was covered with the Bangladesh flag. The Pakistan flag could be seen only at two places – the President's House and Martial Law Headquarters. Members of Awami League's Shwecchashebok Bahini began the day early in the morning, singing in chorus the tunes of "Joy Bangla", while hoisting Bangladesh's flag at Bangabandhu's residence. A crowd of Bangalees thronged in front of the house to hear orders for the next course of action from Bangabandhu himself.

Awami League activists went to consular establishments, requesting, and sometimes demanding, that the Bangladesh flag be flown. The Soviets and British had hoisted the Bangladesh flag while the Iranian, Indonesian and Nepalese had flown the Pakistani flag. The Chinese had initially hoisted the Pakistani flag but had been forced by students to replace it with a Bangladesh flag. The Americans did not fly either flag. [Archer K Blood, The Cruel Birth of Bangladesh, UPL, 2006, pp. 192]

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
