March 7 speech defends universal values
2021-03-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Agencies, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/march-7-speech-defends-universal-values-2065929

Unesco Director General Audrey Azoulay yesterday said the historic March 7 speech of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman defended universal values, freedom, human rights and dignity.

She said this in a video message played on the seventh day of a 10-day special programme marking the birth centenary of Bangabandhu and the golden jubilee of Bangladesh's independence, reports BSS.

The Unesco DG said 50 years ago on March 7, Bangabandhu had delivered his historic and momentous speech that marked the history of Bangladesh and the world, momentous because this day led to the country's independence.

"These are precisely the reasons why Unesco inscribed this historic speech in its memory of the world register. It's also why our organisation is delighted to join in the celebrations of the 100th anniversary of birth of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman," she said.

Azoulay said for five years now, Dhaka has been home to Unesco's international mother language institute and thanks to Bangladesh that international community celebrate now International Mother Language Day every year on February 21.

"We will further strengthen this commitment to culture by creating the Unesco-Bangladesh Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman international prize for creative economy," she added.

GERMAN PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE TO HAMID

German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier has said Bangladesh has undergone an "impressive development and is today a vibrant democracy" with high economic growth rates.

"At the same time, Bangladesh has succeeded in clearly reducing poverty in the country using innovative development policy strategies," he said in a message sent to President Abdul Hamid yesterday.

Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen read out the message at a programme held at the capital's National Parade Square yesterday, marking the birth centenary of Bangabandhu and the golden jubilee of independence, reports UNB.

On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of Bangladesh's independence, the German president congratulated his Bangladesh counterpart and the people of Bangladesh. "I wish you strength and every success for the tasks that lie ahead."
