Celebrating 50 years of Independence
2021-03-23T00:00:00+06:00 | M H Haider
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/cover-story/news/celebrating-50-years-independence-2065181

And we are excited to announce that we are making a commemorative video — sponsored by Tradesworth Household Limited and directed by Goutam Koiri — featuring a plethora of slogans which were chanted during various struggles in our history.

The Bangladesh saga is a chequered one, where numerous protests and revolutions and obviously, the Liberation War, have paved the way to where we are today.

Because whenever our freedom was trampled, or whenever a plot against our identity was been hatched, we stood up — united as a people.

And in unison we chanted slogans, making our demands heard.

Slogans are indeed within the soul of every movement or revolution. After all, a few powerful words can fuel passion, ignite patriotism, unleash wrath, and even bring down autocrats.

Now, what would happen if you compile slogans of some major revolutions and the War? You'd get a quick history of Bangladesh!

Well, that's what The Daily Star aimed to do with this audio-visual production.

We dived deep into history, collected slogans, and chanted and roared them out — for everyone to relish in the glory of our nation and appreciate the sacrifices of our forefathers — all in an electrifying video coming out soon!

Many of these slogans are not chanted anymore; after all, those events and movements are long over and the demands met. On the other hand, many old slogans have also lived on, sometimes evolving slightly to fit into the times.

For the youth, we wish it will shed light into the fascinating past of Bangladesh, introducing many slogans which are now extinct and unheard of.

For older generations, we wish it shall be a nostalgic walk down the memory lane, taking them back to those days of fierce spirit.

And as for us here at The Daily Star, it is our humble tribute to Bangladesh in celebration of its golden jubilee!

Photo: Shahrear Kabir Heemel

Keep your eyes on our Facebook page for the video. Coming out soon!
