Liberation War Museum celebrates its silver jubilee
2021-03-23T13:58:14+06:00 | Zareen Nawar
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/liberation-war-museum-celebrates-its-silver-jubilee-2065453

The Liberation War Museum celebrated its 25th anniversary yesterday, keeping the month of Bangladesh's independence in mind. The celebrations began with a recording of the song, "Muktiro Mondiro Sopano Tole". Members of Liberation War Museum's Board of Trustees Dr Sarwar Ali, Mofidul Hoque, and Sara Zaker welcomed the audience with their speeches. They talked about all the individuals who had a hand in the accomplishments of the museum, and they hoped to see the place being valued by generations to come.

Indian historian Dipesh Chakrabarty was invited to talk about what it means to be a Bengali, over a video call. He has authored several books, articles and academic essays. His knowledge of postcolonial theory and subaltern studies enables him to talk about his experiences, and contemplate what it means to be Bengali.

He stressed upon what it means to live in a secular nation, comparing the numerous Indian flags over the years since the country's independence to signify how the interpretations of religion and secularism changed over time. The fact that Bangladesh fought for independence during 1971 after having experienced World War I, was pivotal to the formation of our country. According to Chakrabarty, our fight for freedom is the reason behind our language Bangla, being recognised worldwide.

He claimed that Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman helped our nation finds its identity. He believes that the flag of Bangladesh has a welcoming aura, which allows even a non-Bangla speaking Bangladeshi to identify as a part of the country. Historical elements, along with Chakrabarty's own anecdotes, gave his lecture a distinct flair. He also fondly remembered his friendship with Ekushey Padak-winning actor Aly Zaker, who passed away in November 2020.

Chakrabarty proved to be an effective speaker, with his zeal for all the subject matters that he touched upon. The celebrations concluded with a Rabindra Sangeet performance by eminent singer Rezwana Choudhury Bannya, and a dance recital by Dhrupad Kala Kendra.

The author is a freelance journalist.
