TV specials to watch on Independence Day
2021-03-25T19:29:56+06:00 | Mormee Mahtab
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/tv-specials-watch-independence-day-2066685

Marking the golden jubilee of Bangladesh's independence, The Daily Star has compiled a list of television specials that audiences can watch on March 26.

Bangladesh Television (BTV) will air a special tele-fiction, titled "Khunghor" tomorrow at 9 pm. The show is conceptualised by Harun Rashid and produced and directed by Abu Touhid. "Khunghor" stars Mamunur Rashid, Monir Ahmed Shakil, Jhuna Chowdhury, and Ahsanul Haque Minu, among others. The plot focuses on a photographer who explores the various aspects of life and nature. One day, his passion for photography takes him to a small town, where arrangements for his accommodation in a bungalow is made.

BTV is also set to air a special programme, titled "Shadhinotar Gaan", with songs by renowned artistes at 3:25 pm tomorrow. The show will be hosted by Priyanka Gope, with discussions and music direction by Shujay Shayam. Musical performances will be presented by renowned personalities like Kalyani Ghosh, Bulbul Mahlanbish, Malay Kumar Ganguly, Dr Arup Ratan Chowdhury and Fakir Alamgir, among others. The show is produced by Mahbuba Ferdous.

Duronto Television will air a special programme, "Amar Shonar Bangla" on the golden jubilee of the independence of Bangladesh. The show, consisting of 26 episodes, will be aired every Friday and Saturday from March 26 at 5.30 pm and 9.30 pm.

In this programme, the history of Bangladesh's struggle for independence will be presented to young children. Renowned journalist, writer and scholar Abul Momen and member of Mukti Sangrami Shilpi Sangstha, renowned singer and teacher Shila Momen will be a part of the show. Apart from various stories of Bangladesh's struggle for independence, 100 children have choreographed 26 patriotic songs in 26 episodes of "Amar Shonar Bangla". The choreography was conducted by 10 renowned dancers, under the supervision of renowned dancer Lubna Mariam.

Alok Basu is behind the research and manuscript of the show. Sheola Bratati Atnaja and Nabid Rahman Turzo, are playing lead characters in one part of the programme, directed by Partho Pratim Haldar.

A special tele-fiction, titled "Janani" will be televised tomorrow, on BanglaVision at 8 pm. Written by Pulok Kanti and directed by Aranya Anwar, the show features Ratna Khan, Shahdat Hossain, and Ujjal Mahmud, among others. Based on true events, the story of "Janani" portrays revolves around the lives of Buddhists in a village. It is set in the period right before the beginning of Liberation War. When six-month-old Pulok, the son of Bina and Mrinal, suddenly becomes afflicted with diarrhea, the people in the neighbourhood realise that the boy is no longer alive.

"Shadhinotar Ponchaash", a special discussion programme is being aired on BanglaVision, highlighting the turbulent days of the Liberation War of 1971. The final episode of the programme will be aired at 11:30 am tomorrow. Freedom fighter and former minister Bir Bikram Mofazzol Hussain Chowdhury Maya and eminent reciter Shimul Mustafa will be present as special guests. Moderated by Bulbul Mahlanobish, the show will commence with the guests discussing the background of the liberation war, along with its impacts on Bangladesh.

On the special occasion, ATN Bangla has arranged a special discussion programme, titled " Shadhinotar Shuborno Joyonti Te Amader Prottasha O Prapti," hosted and directed by Hasan Ahmed Chowdhury. Noted author Selina Hossain, Professor M M Akash, eminent singer Fakir Alamgir, will be present as the speakers at the show. Besides reminiscing about the various events of the war, they will discuss about the hopes and aspirations of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The programme will be televised on ATN Bangla tomorrow at 11 am.
