Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra: the source of inspiration and bravado during the liberation war
2021-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Jinat Jahan Khan
https://www.thedailystar.net/tech-startup/news/swadhin-bangla-betar-kendra-the-source-inspiration-and-bravado-during-the-liberation-war-2067077

The brutal armed operation carried out by the Pakistani army in Dhaka on 25 March 1971 had plunged the life of common people into complete darkness. People were confused and uninformed about the actual situation prevailing in the whole country. The interference of the Pakistani military forces in the communication media wasn't letting people home and abroad know about their barbarities and mercilessness.

Amid this anarchy, an emergency and temporary radio station at Kalurghat called the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra (SBBK) declared the independence of Bangladesh to the world on 26 March 1971. Airing almost every day during the liberation war, the journey of this covert radio station came to an end on 16 December 1971 and was turned into Bangladesh Betar, as we know it now. From a temporary radio station to the main media source during the liberation war.

As the country was pushed into despair and hostilities, this radio station was set up in a two-storey building in Kalurghat, Chattogram. It had no professional studio or proper instruments to record programmes. However, it continued to carry out the inspiring and uplifting programmes how much they could. It relayed the important messages of the government to the common people, gave updates of the battlefield and the war, and connected the whole nation with an unseen thread. Besides, lively patriotic songs, satirical programmes, and short plays kept the spirit of the nation high during the war days. It aided psychological warfare in 1971 and motivated people to keep on living and fight for freedom in the most devastating days of Bangladesh.

Many gifted and incredibly talented artists were involved with this radio station. However, 10 of them were with the SBBK from its beginning till the end. This covert radio station was discarded by the Pakistani force on March 30 because the programmes on it were continuously boosting the nationalistic spirit in people craving for an independent country and the daily news bulletin let people know about the progress of the war and brutalities of the Pakistani army.

However, the second phase of this legendary radio centre soon started at Bogafa, a Tripura state on April 3. And the third phase commenced in Ballygunge, Kolkata on the 25th of May.

Charampatra

Charampatra, a popular monologue rich in sarcasm and bravery was a wonderful programme composed and hosted by M. R. Akhtar Mukul. The ultimate target of this show was to represent the complex and critical political situation and military tactics in a simple and satirical tone. The best thing about his oratory was that general Bengalis can relate to this because of using the typical dialect of old Dhaka.

Charampatra portrayed a fearless Bengali youth who had no proper education but had the potential to fight against the enemies.

Every episode of Charampatra glorified the strength and bravery of our freedom fighters and mock the Pakistani army in a humorous approach to keeping the spirit of youths charged. The voice of Mukul became the source of entertainment as well as inspiration in the dark time of the liberation war.

Jallader Darbar

Another popular program of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra was Jallader Darbar. It was a series of satirical short stories written by Kallyan Mitra. The drama was intended to expose the cruel and barbarous side of General Yahya Khan.

On the other hand, the conversations between Yahya Khan and his wife or followers were caricatured making him look less dangerous to the Bengalis or freedom fighters. The eventual goal was to reduce the terror of General Yahya so that people didn't move backwards from the fight against injustice and oppression. He was called 'Kella Fatey Khan' in it and the main role of this humorous serial was played by Raju Ahmed.

A popular assorted program of the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra was Agnishikha. It had a set of sub-programmes such as Darpan, Oikatan, Kabikhantha, Ranaveri, Recitation etc.

Other popular programmes were- Bajrakantha, Pindir Prolap, Kathgorar Ashami, Pratidhdhani , etc. These became the source of inspiration and strength for the freedom fighters as well as for the mass people.

Songs of inspiration and freedom

Music can elicit different kinds of emotions, even if the words fail to do so. In a devastating time when there is no source of media other than radio, the SBBK took the responsibility to empower and inspire the freedom fighters with some fiery, uplifting, and emotion-filled songs. A shiver still runs down our spine when we hear the songs of freedom of that time.

Thanks to Govinda Halder for the songs with such powerful lyrics that boost up the strength and unite us to this date. Some of his worth-mentioning works during the war are- Ek Shagor Rokter Binimoye, Purbo Digonte Surjo Utheche, Mora Ekti Phul Ke Bachabo Bole Juddho Kori. Besides these, Apel Mahmud's 'Teer Hara Ei Dheuer Shagor', Kazi Nazrul Islam's 'Karar Oi Louho Kopat', Fazl-E-Khuda's 'Salam Salam Hazar Salam', Gazi Mazharul Anwar's 'Joy Bangla, Banglar joy' are some of the best songs played by the SBBK for Bengali people as their inspiration often sank low due to the situation. The SBBK singers were known as 'Voice Soldiers' because they turned their powerful songs into lethal weapons to fight against the enemies.

The Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra represents the importance of freedom in the communication media and how the right approach or use of this media can change a whole nation. And the satirical yet constructive shows convey the message that the agony or devastating state can be overcome in a humorous and fun way through creativities and diversities.

After independence, this legendary radio station started its journey as 'Bangladesh Betar' on the 22nd December of 1971.
