Zia makes radio announcement
2021-03-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/zia-makes-radio-announcement-2067389

March 27, 1971

CHATTOGRAM RESISTANCE

As Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman declared the independence of Bangladesh, resistance began in Chattogram city and many other areas. Intense fighting broke out between the Pakistan military and the freedom fighters.

On behalf of Bangabandhu, Maj Ziaur Rahman, at 7:45pm on March 27, made a radio broadcast from Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra in Kalurghat, north of Chattogram city.

"This is Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra. I, Major Ziaur Rahman, at the directive of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, hereby declare that the independent People's Republic of Bangladesh has been established... In the name of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, I call upon all Bangalees to rise against the attack by the West Pakistan army. We shall fight to the last to free our motherland. By the grace of Allah, victory would be ours. Joy Bangla."

INDIRA GANDHI DEPLORES 'SUPPRESSION'

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi today described the military imposition of martial law in East Pakistan as "not merely suppression of a movement, but meeting unarmed people with tanks".

"An opportunity has been lost in East Pakistan for Pakistan to strengthen herself," Indira Gandhi told cheering members of the Indian Parliament.

"The opportunity has been lost in a manner which is tragic and agonising, about which we could not find strong enough words," she added.

BLOOD'S SITUATION REPORT

American Consul General Archer K Blood wrote in a situation report, submitted on March 27, 1971: According to numerous accounts including eye witness reports, Pak military crackdown on Bengali nationalists has been carried out throughout Dacca swiftly, efficiently (despite heavy resistance from some quarters, including pro-Awami League police and East Pak Rifles). And often with ruthless brutality.

Referring to Indian deputy high commissioner he stated that the Pakistan army surrounded Tanti Bazar and Shankhari Bazari, predominantly Hindu areas, burnt houses and innocent people. Residents fleeing from this area were also not spared, he added.

He further reported that thousands of Bangalees were streaming through the city, carrying personal belongings, to get out to villages for shelter.

Brian Bell, the public affairs officer of the American Consulate in Dhaka, toured the city on the same day and reported that the Ittefaq offices were razed; police barracks at Rajarbagh police camp levelled, apparently by heavy guns; Iqbal Hall badly damaged, dead body lying 10 feet from entrance; large area on the outskirts of Old Dhaka were gutted.

The army demolished the Central Shaheed Minar.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
