Introducing winners of The Daily Star’s ‘Muktijuddho Olympiad’
2021-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Sadia Tahsin
https://www.thedailystar.net/star-youth/news/introducing-winners-the-daily-stars-muktijuddho-olympiad-2067073

The Daily Star's "Muktijuddho Olympiad", powered by efood, aimed to educate young students about the history of Bangladesh. Nearly 4,800 students registered for the online completion across four categories: School (Class 4-6), School (Class 7-10), College, and University. The participants were provided with a question bank for preparations. Winners of the contest were announced recently, after a fierce competition.  The champion, first-runner up and second-runner up in each category received BDT 20,000, BDT 15,000, and BDT 10,000 respectively, along with crests and certificates.

Saraf Wamia Hassan from Manarat Dhaka International School and College, was the champion in the School Category (Class 4-6).  "I want to thank my parents and my school teacher Hasan Hafizur Rahman, for guiding me through this journey. The quiz was very well-designed, and the variety of questions truly tested our in-depth knowledge about the Liberation War," she said.

Afiya Farzana Diya of Govt Laboratory High School in Mymensingh was the champion in the School Category (Class 7-10). "I am delighted beyond expression. The competition was challenging, but it is our responsibility to keep learning about our martyrs and our Liberation War," she said. "Internet connectivity was a problem at times, but I am happy that I made it through."

"The pressures of this competition were immense, but the overall experience was inspiring. My family was very supportive," shared Ayan Chakraborty from Amrita Lal Dey College in Barishal, who won in the College Category. "It is our job to know about our country's history and to spread our knowledge. All other participants did a great job."

Mahabun Arefin Mehrab Opee from University of Dhaka was the champion in the University Category. "I have always been a fan of The Daily Star, and partaking in this competition was a privilege. The university rounds were very competitive. The talented participants, the timing, and the marking system challenged us and assessed our decision-making, stress, and time management skills," he said. "I would like to thank my parents, and both of my brothers. The rich history of Bangladesh needs to be communicated on a global scale. We should learn about our country not only for government jobs, but also for the joy of learning, and as responsible citizens."

The author is a marketing student from North South University. Write to her at [email protected] .
