Language movement veteran Abul Hossain no more
2021-03-31T19:07:16+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/bangladesh/news/language-movement-veteran-abul-hossain-no-more-2069717

Language movement veteran Md Abul Hossain passed away today at the age of 87.

The language movement veteran breathed his last at Rajshahi Medical College Hospital at 4:00pm today, reports our Rajshahi correspondent quoting his son Abul Hasnat Bidyut.

Hossain along with others had set up the first-ever Shaheed Minar of the country in Rajshahi on the night of February 21, 1952.

Hossain was suffering from old age complications for several weeks. He was taken to a private hospital in the morning and later was shifted to RMCH after his condition deteriorated, Bidyut said.

"Born in Indian Maldaha on July 3, 1934, Abul Hossain went to Rajshahi in the 1950s and took admission at Rajshahi College. He participated in the language movement," said Toshikul Islam Raja who authored the book "Rajshahite Bhasha Andolon."

Hossain was one of those veterans who protested the killings in Dhaka on February 21, 1952. On that very night, the language movement veterans as part of their allied decision erected a pillar with bricks and clay near the main gate of the college hostel commemorating the martyrs of that day.

"The pillar is well-considered among most language movement veterans as the country's first-ever Shaheed Minar. However, the Muslim League activists assisted by the then Pakistani police damaged the pillar before sunrise," Raja said.

Later in place of the pillar, a Shaheed Minar was built, he added.

The language veteran also served time in jail for taking part in the language movement. He was a school teacher by profession.

Rajshahi Mayor AHM Khairuzzman Liton, different social and cultural organisations, and the press club issued statements condoling Abul Hossain's death.

He will be buried at the Tikapara Graveyard in the city tonight after the city's people pay respect to his departed soul.
