Tajuddin calls on Indira
2021-04-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/tajuddin-calls-indira-2071549

April 4, 1971

INDIRA-TAJUDDIN MEETING

On April 4, 1971, Tajuddin Ahmad called on Indian PM Indira Gandhi at the office in her residence. The conversation started with Indira's question, "How is Sheikh Mujib? Is he alright?" Tajuddin said that he had no contact with Mujib since the night of March 25, but added that Mujib had proclaimed the independence of Bangladesh. He sought Indian government's support for carrying forward the Liberation War. [ Barrister M. Amir-ul Islam, Muktijuddher Sriti, Kagoj Prokashoni, 1991, pg. 31]

Indira Gandhi offered support that included arms and ammunitions, communication equipment and broadcasting facilities, civil supplies and medicines, safe passage and transit arrangements. However, she didn't touch upon the question of recognition.

Earlier a committee was formed by Indira Gandhi to consider the requirements of the liberation movement of Bangladesh. It was also decided that relationship at the political level would be handled only through the agency of R&AW, and, at this stage, BSF would be main executive agency. [Srinath Raghavan, 1971: A Global History of the Creation of Bangladesh, Permanent Black, 2013, pp. 62-63]

STRATEGIC MEETING AT TELIAPARA

The first strategic meeting among the high-ranking Bangalee army officials were held today at the Bungalow of Habiganj's Teliapara tea garden. The meeting commenced from 10:00am as scheduled. Col Osmani and Brig Pandey, the then director-general of the Eastern command of the Indian Border Security Force (BSF) attended the meeting. Among others Lt Col MA Rab, Lt Col SM Reza, Maj Quazi Nuruzzaman, Maj Ziaur Rahman, Maj KM Shafiullah, Maj Khaled Mosharraf, and Maj Shafayet Jamil were present at the meeting. They emphasised on formation of a government to seek global support. They also formed Mukti Fauz comprising all resistance forces, and Col Osmani was entrusted with commandership of the Mukti Fauz. They decided to seek immediate support from the Indian government regarding the supply of arms and ammunition.

US ARMS IN DHAKA

A report published in St Louis Post-Dispatch today stated that the United States must share the guilt in the atrocity committed inBangladesh. It further reported that the tanks were American built, furnished as part of well over two billion dollars in military aid given to Pakistan in return for its willingness to ally itself with United States objectives. Giant transport planes supplied by the United States carried the troops used in the suppression, it added.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
