US asks for ‘peaceful accommodation’
2021-04-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/us-asks-peaceful-accommodation-2073393

April 7, 1971

RESISTANCE WAR CONTINUES

Today, a small team of Bangalee members of EPR put up a brave fight against Pakistan EPR forces in Nazirhat, Chattogram and captured 18 of them as prisoners.

On the same day, the Pakistan army launched a three-pronged attack on Kalurghat Radio Station in Chattogram. The resistance fighters had to retreat in the face of heavy attack, and took shelter at their base in Kalurghat.

The resistance battles started today in Shilmandi, Narsingdi. The Bangladeshi force assembled a small team at its hideout at Danga and attacked the Pakistan army. Heavy fighting went on for two days. The Pakistan army suffered heavy casualties in the fight. On April 9, the liberation fighters retreated to Ashuganj in the face of reinforced attack from the Pakistan army.

US URGES PAKISTAN FOR 'PEACEFUL ACCOMMODATION'

The United States of America called on Pakistan today to take "every feasible step" to end the conflict and to achieve a "peaceful accommodation" in the civil disturbances that have racked the eastern half of the country since March 25.

Noting that it was prepared to assist in any international humanitarian effort to alleviate suffering caused by recent events, the United States also urged the Pakistani government to avail itself of offers of assistance from the international community.

"We have discussed these matters with the Government of Pakistan," Charles W Bray, State Department spokesman said. "And we will continue to do so."

The Pakistani embassy declined immediate comment on the United States statement.

The American spokesperson also informed that the airlift of approximately 500 private American citizens, official dependents and United States employees from Dhaka was completed yesterday.

In an editorial titled "Bloodbath in Bengal" the New York Times wrote today: "The United States would have a humanitarian duty to speak out against the bloodbath in Bengal, as the Soviet Union already has done. Washington, as Pakistan's chief arms supplier, has a double obligation: to declare its disapproval of the tactics employed and to make clear that no additional American arms—including spare parts—will be sent to Pakistan until this savage repression in the East is stopped."

It further commented that America's own interests called for it to do everything possible to help bring a speedy end to a civil conflict that could touch off a chain reaction of communal strife throughout the Indian subcontinent, with grave international implications.

INDIA IS MEDDLING: CHINA

The Chinese Chargé d'Affaires in New Delhi today accused India of interfering in the internal affairs of Pakistan. This is the first time that such remarks had been made officially by a Chinese mission though, till now, there was no reaction from Peking regarding the development in Bangladesh.

REPLY TO 'DISSENT CABLE'

In response to the "dissent cable" sent by the US officials in Dhaka, William Rogers, the Secretary of State, sent a telegram today to the American consul general in Dhaka. Addressing the complaint that the US had failed to denounce the suppression of democracy and the atrocities committed by the Pakistan Martial Law Authority, the secretary of state wrote: "We view this as primarily an internal matter of the Pakistan government and most other governments have the same view. Reports have been conflicting. Media in the US has been carrying stories of atrocities on both sides although we do not, of course, equate the two."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
