Tajuddin seeks arms support
2021-04-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/tajuddin-seeks-arms-support-2075497

April 11, 1971

TAJUDDIN'S RADIO SPEECH

The Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro today broadcast a speech by the prime minister of the newly formed government-in-exile Tajuddin Ahmad. On behalf of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his government, Tajuddin expressed his deep respect to all the martyrs who sacrificed their lives in the resistance against the Pakistan army. He also thanked the Bangladeshi people for the unstinted support to the cause of Bangladesh's liberation struggle. He appealed to the Bangalees all over the world to come forward to the assistance of the liberation fighters of Bangladesh.

Tajduddin declared that the headquarters of the Independent Bangladesh Government had been established in the free zone of the south-west part of Bangladesh. He provided a list of the commanders who were entrusted with the task of conducting resistance war in various parts of the country.

In his speech, the Bangladesh PM sought unconditional support from the friendly countries of the world in the form of arms. "We are seeking this support as an independent state. We want this support to resist the military junta."

THE BATTLE OF KALURGHAT BRIDGE

Liberation fighters put a brave fight today to defend the strategically important Kalurghat Bridge on the Chittagong-Cox's Bazar road. Shamsher M Chowdhury, BB, then a lieutenant in the army, fought valiantly in the battle. He shares his memory in the following words: We were positioned at the north end of the Kalurghat bridge with about a section of my soldiers. Capt Haroon was there with a handful of EPR troops. Some brave, young college students were there along with us.

Early in the morning of April 11, Pakistan army started heavy artillery shelling on our position. After about half an hour of shelling, our position was attacked by the enemy with more than a company's (about 200 men) strength. Our total strength was about 20 men including elements of EPR.

As the battle raged on, casualties on both sides occurred. Soon Capt Haroon was wounded. I asked the brave students to carry Capt Haroon across the bridge to the other side where he could receive medical attention.  We managed to inflict casualties on the enemy. After some time, it became difficult for us to stay and fight because we were badly outnumbered and seriously outgunned.

As Capt Haroon was being carried across the bridge, the Pakistan army started firing at him. So, I took up the task of covering his evacuation. At the same time, I asked my troops to start withdrawing. I covered their withdrawal. By the time the last sepoy had crossed the bridge to safety, I was left absolutely alone.

By then my position was surrounded on all sides. Withdrawal for me became impossible. I became desperate, came out of my bunker and wildly fired away at the advancing enemy. I can clearly remember that I had hit and killed three of the enemy and a fourth one was lying down wounded.

Just then I was hit. My weapon flew off my hand and landed some distance away. I fell flat on the bridge. I tried to get up but I failed to move. I have been hit on my left thigh. The bullet had passed all the way through the lower portion of my belly and was lodged in my right hip. The Pakistan army was now very near and I was apprehending that very soon they will reach me and then torture me to death. I thought it better to commit suicide then to be caught by them. But suicide become impossible as my weapon was lying too far away from me to reach.

Finding no other way, I continued to lie down and await death. But death spared me. The Pakistani army walked up to me, repeatedly kicked me in my stomach, calling me a traitor. They then decided to take me as a prisoner of war. I was to remain a prisoner until December 17.

SCHOLARS CALL FOR AN END TO KILLING IN EAST PAKISTAN

An appeal circulated by Robert Dorfman, professor of economics, and signed by more than two dozen specialists on modern Pakistan urged the president of Pakistan to stop using military force against rebellious East Pakistan. The appeal appeared today as an ad in the Washington Post.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
