Independence proclaimed
2021-04-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/independence-proclaimed-2075085

April 10, 1971

THE PROCLAMATION OF INDEPENDENCE

The Mujibnagar Government was formed today to conduct the Bangladesh War of Liberation. The official announcement declaring independence of Bangladesh, known as the Proclamation of Independence, was also issued today. The cabinet of the government-in-exile took oath on 17 April, 1971 at Baidyanathtala (renamed Mujibnagar after the proclamation), a border area in the present Meherpur district, where Professor M Yusuf Ali, an MNA, formally read out the Proclamation of Independence.

The proclamation was drafted by Barrister M Amir-ul Islam and reviewed by Indian Barrister Subrata Roy Chowdhury. The proclamation was patterned after the American Declaration of Independence.

The Proclamation read: "… Whereas in the facts and circumstances of such treacherous conduct Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the undisputed leader of the 75 million people of Bangladesh, in due fulfillment of the legitimate right of self-determination of the people of Bangladesh, duly made a declaration of independence at Dacca on March 26, 1971, and urged upon the people of Bangladesh to defend the honour and integrity of Bangladesh,

AND

Whereas in the conduct of a ruthless and savage war the Pakistani authorities committed and are still continuously committing numerous acts of genocide and unprecedented tortures, amongst others on the civilian and unarmed people of Bangladesh,

AND

Whereas the Pakistan Government by levying an unjust war and committing genocide and by other repressive measures made it impossible for the elected representatives of the people of Bangladesh to meet and frame a Constitution, and give to themselves a Government,

AND

Whereas the people of Bangladesh by their heroism, bravery and revolutionary fervour have established effective control over the territories of Bangladesh, We the elected representatives of the people of Bangladesh, as honour bound by the mandate given to us by the people of Bangladesh whose will is supreme duly constituted ourselves into a Constituent Assembly, and having held mutual consultations, and in order to ensure for the people of Bangladesh equality, human dignity and social justice, declare and constitute Bangladesh to be sovereign Peoples' Republic and thereby confirm the declaration of independence already made by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman."

The Proclamation of Independence declared that the independence of Bangladesh be deemed to have come into effect from 26 March 1971. It legalised the Mujibnagar government and gave direction to all involved in the War of Liberation for establishing the chain of command. It also affirmed that Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman should be the president of the Republic and that Syed Nazrul Islam should be the vice president of the Republic.

LAWS CONTINUANCE ENFORCEMENT ORDER

Syed Nazrul Islam, the vice president and acting president of Bangladesh, in exercise of the powers conferred on him by the Proclamation of Independence ordered today that all laws that were in force in Bangladesh on 25th March, 1971, should subject to the Proclamation aforesaid and continue to be so in force with such consequential changes as may be necessary on account of the creation of the sovereign independent State of Bangladesh.

All government officials -- civil, military, judicial and diplomatic -- who took the oath of allegiance to Bangladesh should continue in their offices on terms and conditions of service so long enjoyed by them and that all district judges and district magistrates, in the territory of Bangladesh and all diplomatic representatives elsewhere should arrange to administer the oath of allegiance to all government officials within their jurisdiction. The order should be deemed to have come into effect from the 26th day of March, 1971, it added.

ARMY DRIVE REPORTED

Pakistani army troops were reported to have launched a major offensive throughout embattled East Pakistan today, attacking the resistance fighters with tanks, air strikes, artillery and foot soldiers. [New York Times, April 11, 1971]

The defensive hold of Pabna and Sylhet collapsed today.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
