Bangalees claim Calcutta Consulate
2021-04-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bangalees-claim-calcutta-consulate-2079225

April 18, 1971

MISSION IN CALCUTTA IS TAKEN OVER BY BANGALEES STAFF

The predominantly Bangalee staff of Pakistan's diplomatic mission in Calcutta took over the establishment today and transformed it into a mission of the newly proclaimed provisional government of Bangladesh.

The head of the mission, M Hossain Ali, hauled down the Pakistani flag and hoisted the Bangalee independence movement's green, red and gold standard as the Bangalee staff cheered.

It was the first Pakistani diplomatic mission to declare its allegiance to the government of Bangladesh since the Pakistani Army launched its attack in Bangladesh on March 25.

The Pakistani mission in Calcutta was a deputy high commission.

Hossain Ali, the deputy high commissioner, announced that henceforth the Calcutta deputy high commission "will function as the mission of Bangladesh in India." The move came a day after a ceremony at Baidyanathtala, Meherpur that officially declared the creation of the new Bangalee nation.

He issued a 1,600-word statement, recounting how the Pakistani government had flouted the clear verdict of a democratic election in Bangladesh and engaged itself in "a planned attempt to subdue and crush the entire Bangalee nation".

Hossain Ali further said that more than 50 of the approximately 80 members of the mission were Bangalees. He said the 30 West Pakistanis would not be kept in the mission and that any of them "who wish to return to West Pakistan will be allowed to do so without hindrance and at the earliest opportunity."

It is also reported that the entire money in the credit of the Pakistan Deputy High Commission in a Calcutta bank was withdrawn on April 17. The measure had the approval of all senior members of the mission.

MUJIB MOVED

Associated Press reported today that Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the imprisoned leader of Bangladesh Liberation Movement, had been taken to another jail after treatment in the Combined Military Hospital in Rawalpindi. Bangabandhu was now at a prison at Mianwali, informed the news agency. But according to Government informants, Sheikh Mujib was on a hunger strike.

PURGE OF BANGALEES FROM PAKISTAN CIVIL SERVICE

A purge of Bangalees from the Pakistan armed forces and key Civil Service posts was reported under way. It is reported that the aim was to remove "unreliable elements" from every aspect of the government's drive against the independence seeking Bangalees. Hundreds of Bangalee servicemen in West Pakistan had been sent on leave but had been forbidden to return to their homes in the eastern province. It is further reported that the 20 Bangalee civil servants had either lost their jobs or been given lesser positions.

INDONESIA WILL NOT RECOGNISE BANGLADESH

Indonesia would not recognize Bangladesh because it didn't want to see other people's country split, told Indonesian Foreign Minister Adam Malik today. He reaffirmed that Indonesia regarded the Pakistani crisis as the internal affair of the country, and no outsiders had the right to interfere.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
