Bhashani writes to Mao
2021-04-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bhashani-writes-mao-2080305

April 20, 1971

BHASHANI'S LETTERS TO CHINESE LEADERS

Maulana Bhashani, leader of the National Awami Party (Bhashani), had written personal letters to Chairman Mao and the Premier of the People's Republic of China, Chou en-Lai, expressing surprise at Peking's support to the Pakistani military junta.

Bhashani had at the same time expressed his sincere support to the Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Tajuddin Ahmad, for jointly fighting with the Mukti Fauz to oust the occupation army of Pakistan.

It was learnt that Bhashani, who had been given a heroic reception during his visit to Peking and knew the Chinese leaders personally, described in his recent letters in vivid detail the ruthless atrocities of the Pakistan army on the innocent unarmed people in Bangladesh.

Bhashani appealed to the Chinese leaders for lending whole-hearted support to the liberation struggle of Bangladesh against the genocide let loose by the Pakistan occupation army. He also hoped to see a change in China's policy in favour of the freedom fighters of Bangladesh sooner than later. China would soon, he expected, publicly condemn the brutal atrocities of the Pakistan army and back the people's liberation struggle in Bangladesh.

PAKISTAN DEMANDS INDIA OUST DIPLOMATS

Pakistan demanded today that India oust dissident East Pakistani diplomats who "seized" the Pakistani deputy high commission, or consulate, in Calcutta on April 18, 1971.

India refused. The foreign ministry of India said the country was precluded by law from using force to evict anyone.

In presenting his government's demands to India, the Pakistani high commissioner in New Delhi announced that a new deputy high commissioner had been appointed to head the regional office at Calcutta.

The Pakistani note requested that the commission "be cleared of persons who might have taken unlawful possession of it."

"Any failure on the part of the Government of India in this regard would be a violation of international conventions and would be interpreted by the Government of Pakistan as an unfriendly act," the note added.

AK Ray, a foreign ministry official of India, told the Pakistani high commissioner that while India would not evict the dissident East Pakistanis, the country would extend protection and facilities to the new appointee for the Calcutta post.

COMMUNISTS PLEDGE SUPPORT

TO BANGLADESH GOVT

The question of Soviet recognition to the independent Bangladesh government had assumed a special significance after the central committee of the pro-Moscow Communist Party of East Pakistan, headed by Moni Singh and Khoka Ray, today expressed unequivocal support to the democratic republic of Bangladesh headed by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and appealed for its recognition by all progressive and Communist countries of the world.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
