Fleeing by the thousands
2021-04-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/fleeing-the-thousands-2080933

April 21, 1971

REFUGEES JAM BONGAON CAMPS

Driven by the Pakistani troops' genocide in Bangladesh, the influx of evacuees had been so great in Bongaon in 24-Parganas district that admission into one of the three camps had been stopped by the state government and a fourth camp was being opened. Over 21,000 refugees had been given shelter in these three camps. As the largest number of refugees enter through the Petrapole border, a camp close to the border outpost registered more than 8,000 persons today.

The number of refugees overall was put at 200,000, with half that number crossing the border in the last three days, reported Reuters.

PAKISTAN ACCUSES INDIA OF ATTACK

The Pakistani government said tonight that Indian troops had been firing from across the border at a Pakistani post, the border post near Hilli, all day, and it called on India to "stop immediately its unprovoked attack. Otherwise the responsibility for the consequences will lie with the Indian authorities," the Pakistani government said.

No comment was immediately forthcoming from the Indian authorities on the latest charge.

AN INTERNAL MATTER?

New York Times in an editorial titled "An internal matter?" published today, severely criticised the US government's position that the Pakistani military government's slaughter of democratically elected leaders and repression of the majority of its population in East Pakistan is strictly "an internal matter".

It termed the US policy as dangerously short-sighted and wrote: A particularly heavy burden of responsibility falls on the United States Government since Washington's arms provide the principal muscle of West Pakistan's military power and American economic aid will become increasingly crucial for the Pakistani Government's survival. Continued blind backing for the military regime in Islamabad can only lead to disaster for this country's substantial interests on the Indian subcontinent.

New York Times also criticised the Pakistan government for making the conflict an international issue by attempting to place the blame for Bangalee resistance on neighboring India. It warned that mounting tensions between India and Pakistan could explode into a war that might quickly involve one or more of the major powers. The newspaper urged United Nations Security Council and its member states to do all that was in their power to try to forestall such a development.

JUSTICE CHOWDHURY APPOINTED SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE

Acting President Syed Nazrul Islam, on behalf of the Mujibnagar Government, today appointed Justice Abu Sayed Chowdhury as the special representative of the Government of Bangladesh for presenting and receiving communication to and from foreign countries, various heads of states, diplomatic missions abroad, United Nations organisations and other international bodies.

'BANGLADESH WILL BE ONE OF WORLD'S WORST HEADACHES'

In a backchannel message to the US President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger, Joseph Farland, the US Ambassador to Pakistan, provided the following assessment on the future of the East Pakistan crisis: "East Pakistan, having become a garrison state, will eventually bring about the dissolution of Pakistan as it now exists. When this will happen or in what manner it will happen is only a guess; economic stresses will weigh heavily in the balance on both questions. In the interim, India can be expected to develop systematic program of infiltration and arms aid. Guerrilla warfare is virtually assured, but the extent of it is yet uncertain. Internationally, Bangla Desh advocates will make use of all public and private forums. If and when Bangla Desh becomes a reality, it will be one of world's worst headaches, having little economic or bureaucratic infrastructure and virtually no natural resources to build upon. It is unbelievable, but in an area about the size of Louisiana, the population is expected to reach 200–275 million in the year 2000."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
