India requests UN assistance for refugees
2021-04-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/india-requests-un-assistance-refugees-2081533

April 22, 1971

YAHYA SURPASSED CZAR, CHIANG: BHASHANI

Maulana Bhashani, president of the National Awami Party (NAP-Bhashani), said in a press statement that the examples of Chiang-ki-shek in China and Czar in Russia and British oppression in undivided India or zulum of Jalem Yazid at Karbala pale into insignificance before the latest example of atrocity perpetrated by Yahya's army. The Maulana appealed to the people of Bangladesh to forge a unity like steel and to be on alert against Mirzafars, the agents of the military junta and the vested interests. He told the people, "Our victory is certain. God hates the oppressors and traitors."

Maulana Bhashani also sent a telegram to US President Richard Nixon and appealed to him to do the needful to check use of US arms by Yahya's government for brutally slaying lakhs of innocent, helpless, unarmed masses in Bangladesh.

CHOLERA AND SMALLPOX REPORTED

The West Bengal state government reported today that cholera and smallpox had broken out among nearly half a million refugees who had fled to India from East Pakistan. The state commissioner for refugees, Benoy Mandal, appealed for foreign aid to meet the emergency.

Benoy Mandal told newsmen that 451,000 refugees had reached West Bengal. He said 107,000 were being accommodated in emergency camps and that 344,000 were staying with relatives and friends.

"The situation is approaching the magnitude of a national disaster," Benoy Mandal said. "It will cause a serious strain on India's national resources. But you may be assured that so long as we eat, so the refugees will eat."

It was also reported that India had requested United Nations assistance for the half million refugees from East Pakistan. The request was made today to Secretary General Thant by Samar Sen, India's chief delegate.

United Nations sources said that Thant had been urging Pakistan to allow relief efforts and that both the United Nations and the Red Cross were prepared to act. But Pakistan government continued to refuse help.

PAKISTAN REPORTS INDIANS DO NOT RECOGNIZE BANGALEES

India gave assurances that she did not recognise the so called Bangladesh regime proclaimed by separatists in East Pakistan, the Pakistani radio said tonight.

The radio reported that the assurances were conveyed to the foreign ministry in Islamabad by BK Acharya, India's high commissioner there.

According to the broadcast, Acharya also said India would not "grant any diplomatic privileges" to M Hossain Ali, the former Pakistani deputy high commissioner in Calcutta, who few days ago proclaimed himself the Calcutta representative of Bangladesh.

IT'S A WAR BETWEEN TWO COUNTRIES: BRITISH MP

B Douglas-Mann, Labour member of the British Parliament said in Calcutta today that what was going on in East Bengal was a war between two countries. He further said that East Bengal was no longer a part of Pakistan, nor a rapprochement now possible. He held that an economic blockade against Pakistan which was already on the verge of bankruptcy as a result of the war could bring about an immediate end to the war.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
