Another Bangalee diplomat defects
2021-04-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/another-bangalee-diplomat-defects-2083829

April 26, 1971

BANGALEE DIPLOMAT RENOUNCES TIES WITH PAKISTAN REGIME

The 28'year'old vice consul of Pakistan in the US renounced his ties with the Pakistani government today, saying he would "not serve a government killing our own people".

With his 20‐year‐old wife at his side, AH Mahmoud Ali read a statement at a news conference pledging allegiance to the Bangladesh government. He announced that he and his wife were asking the United States for political asylum. An official of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service said that the request would be considered.

Mahmoud Ali was the first member of the Pakistani foreign service in the United States to come out in support of the Bangladesh independence movement.

Mahmoud Ali said at the news conference held at the Church World Center, 777 United Nations Plaza, that the Pakistan government ordered him to return home last week. He added that the likely reason was that he could not hide his sympathy for his fellow Bangalees. He said Bangalees at the consulate and others serving abroad had been kept from doing their usual work, prohibited from handling government business and were also spied upon when they visited other Bangalees.

Mahmoud Ali estimated that there were 200 Pakistani officials serving abroad and that 25 percent of them were Bangalees.

UN SHOULD SEND OBSERVERS TO BANGLADESH: MANN

Labour member of British Parliament Bruce Douglas Mann demanded that the UN immediately send an observer team to Bangladesh with full military protection. And if the Pakistan government refused to allow entry of any such team the UN should send an expeditionary force, as such procedures had international precedence.

Mann, who had been to Bangladesh and met Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad and General Osmany, told a news conference at Calcutta today that he would make attempts in London to organise an international brigade for fighting in Bangladesh along with the freedom fighters there. He would also urge his organisation in London to send arms to Bangladesh freedom fighters.

NEW ZEALAND MP CALLS FOR ARMS EMBARGO

"All the nations should place an embargo on military hardware being carried to Pakistan. Any nation selling arms to that country will perpetuate a crime against humanity."

This was what TJ Young, a member of New Zealand Parliament told newsmen in Calcutta today. He wanted an international team of observers to visit Bangladesh immediately. "I shall ask my government to use its influence at international level in this regard," T J Young promised.

INDIA RESTRICTS TRAVEL BY PAKISTANI AIDES

The Indian government imposed restrictions today on the travel of Pakistani diplomats and their families and servants, making it impossible for them to leave India without New Delhi's permission.

The Indian Government said it was doing this in retaliation for similar restrictions that Pakistan had allegedly imposed -- but not announced -- recently on the travel of Indian diplomats in Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
