Bhashani’s telegram to world leaders
2021-04-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bhashanis-telegram-world-leaders-2083181

April 25, 1971

BHASHANI APPEALS TO WORLD LEADERS

National Awami Party President Moulana Bhashani renewed his appeal to several world leaders to help the cause of Bangladesh. In a telegram, Bhashani requested the United Nations Secretary General U Thant to issue an immediate appeal to stop the brutal massacre of innocent people of Bangladesh. He also requested him to send observers to Bangladesh to see the nature and volume of looting, arson, mass killing and molestation of women by Pakistan army.

Bhashani appealed to the Soviet leaders to take more positive action to stop the barbarous massacres of hundreds of thousands of unarmed helpless people of Bangladesh.

Appreciating the statement issued by President Podgorny on the situation in Bangladesh, Bhashani said this was not enough and more positive action was urgently required.

He also appealed to British Prime Minister Edward Heath and French President Pompidou, President Tito of Yugoslavia and President Answar Sadat of Egypt to raise voice against the brutal suppression of human rights and extend immediate recognition and all possible help to the government of Bangladesh. He also sent identical telegrams to Diallo Telli, secretary general of the Organisation of African Unity, and Abdul Khaleq Hassouna, secretary general of the Arab League.

GENERAL LULL IN FIGHTING

As the curtain fell on the first month of the war of liberation, Bangladesh cabinet appeared busy with the twin task of carrying on the war and reorganising the civil administration in the liberated zones. There was a general lull in the fighting between Mukti Fouj and the Pakistan Army today except for some isolated encounters. In one of them, the Mukti Fouj successfully repulsed an attack on Pakuria village in Dinajpur. The Mukti Fouj inflicted heavy casualties on the Pakistani troops.

Today, Pakistan indirectly admitted the shelling of Benapole border areas. Radio Pakistan in its news bulletin claimed that Pakistan troops sealed the border with India at Petrapole after beating back a band of 'infiltrators' and their 'collaborators'.

FLOW OF REFUGEES FROM BANGLADESH UNINTERRUPTED

During the previous 12 days, Tripura received about 100,000 refugees from Bangladesh and of them 50,000 were in camps.

At Sabroom alone, 20,000 refugees had gone from Chattogram. Sabroom had a population of 5,000 only. On an average 5,000 to 6,000 refugees were pouring into Tripura every day. Accommodation for the refugees had been provided mostly in the educational institutions.

Another 100,000 refugees went to Haldibari, Cooch Bihar. The refugees went here following heavy shelling of Saidpur, Nilphamari and Thakurgaon towns by Pakistani troops.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
