‘Don’t squeeze Yahya’
2021-04-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/dont-squeeze-yahya-2084317

April 27, 1971

DON'T SQUEEZE YAHYA AT THIS TIME: NIXON

In a memorandum sent to President Richard Nixon today, the US President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger provided three policy options towards the East Pakistan crisis: 1) unqualified backing for West Pakistan, 2) neutrality which in effect leans toward East Pakistan, and 3) an effort to help Yahya achieve a negotiated settlement. Nixon approved the third option and added a handwritten note that reads: "To all hands. Don't squeeze Yahya at this time." He underlined "Don't" three times.

In the assessment of the third option, Kissinger wrote: "[It] would have the advantage of making the most of the relationship with Yahya while engaging in a serious effort to move the situation toward conditions less damaging to US and Pakistani interests. Its disadvantage is that it might lead to a situation in which progress toward a political settlement had broken down, the US had alienated itself from the 600 million people in India and East Pakistan and the US was unable to influence the West Pakistani government to make the concessions necessary for a political settlement."

ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY SET UP IN BANGLADESH

AHM Kamaruzzaman, a minister of the provisional government, said today that an administrative machinery had already been set up to coordinate the Liberation War. He, however, declined to disclose the names of all the administrative heads for security reasons.

The minister said the new administration would try to fulfil the demands of the people by keeping a direct link with them. Kamaruzzaman, who recently travelled inside Bangladesh, said the movement of the Pakistani troops were now restricted to the cities only. But other areas were now completely under their control. He said it was a fact that at some places the Mukti Fouj had to retreat but this did not mean a defeat.

The minister said he was glad to see the high morale of the freedom fighters. He was confident that the millions of people of Bangladesh would fight to the last drop of their blood. He added that attainment of complete freedom could help to forget the agonies of genocide that had been perpetrated in Bangladesh.

INDIAN MISSION STAFF IN DHAKA INTERNED

The diplomatic deadlock between India and Pakistan in connection with the repatriation of diplomats, staff and dependents of the respective mission in Calcutta and Dhaka continued today. Pakistan in its latest move practically interned the personnel of the Indian Deputy High Commission in Dhaka, including the head of the mission, KC Sen Gupta, after the mission's closure yesterday. India tonight protested strongly to Pakistan over the internment. The internment was probably in retaliation to India's action in barring the exit of Pakistani personnel in India without prior permission from the government.

ISLAM DOESN'T PERMIT SUCH BLOODSHED: JAMIAT ULEMA

The Jamiat Ulema-i-Hind today expressed its resentment, deepest sorrow and grief over the inhuman atrocities in Bangladesh. A resolution adopted at the conclusion of a two-day meeting of its working committee said, "Islam does not permit such bloodshed and rampage." The Jamiat appealed to intellectuals, thinkers, statesmen and conscientious men all over the world to make fullest efforts to stop large-scale killing and destruction.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
