Heavier inflow of refugees feared
2021-04-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/heavier-inflow-refugees-feared-2085453

April 29, 1971

BRITISH MPS URGE UK TO ENSURE RELIEF WORK

A delegation headed by Labour MP John Stonehouse and top officials of War on Want, Christian Aid and Oxfam, called on Sir Alec Douglas Home, British foreign secretary, and told him that Britain should do something so that international relief work could be started in Bangladesh.

The former minister for development Reg Prentice MP also led a deputation to the present minister Richard Wood, and told him not to give British aid to Pakistan until the Bangladesh situation was politically settled.

Another British MP, Bruce Douglas-Mann, who had been in India to assess the situation, informed that he was carrying a special message from Bangladesh Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad for the British government.

INDIA'S REFUGEE CONCERN

The heavy spate of refugee influx from Bangladesh was causing a grave concern to the Government of India. Till yesterday, the Indian government's estimate was that about 700,000 had crossed the border and entered West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura. The Government of India proposed to accommodate the refugees in camps as near the border as possible instead of dispersing them to other states.

YAHYA GETS LETTER FROM KOSYGIN

Pakistan foreign office spokesman said today that President Yahya Khan had received a message from the Soviet Prime Minister Kosygin. According to Radio Pakistan the message was in reply to one sent by Yahya. The content of the message was not disclosed. Soviet President Podgorny in a message to Yahya early this month had called for an end to the bloodbath in Bangladesh.

BE READY FOR ANY EVENTUALITY: BHUTTO

The Pakistan People's Party Chairman Zulfikar Ali Bhutto asked the people of Pakistan to be prepared for any eventuality. He was speaking to newsmen at the Islamabad airport today following a meeting with Yahya Khan. He told questioners that he could not say whether there was any danger of war in view of India's present attitude.

Bhutto also informed that he would soon visit East Pakistan to observe the situation there and meet local political leaders.

Earlier, Bhutto had a meeting with the Chinese ambassador in Pakistan. He told newsmen that he had conveyed his country's gratitude towards China for its support to "unity and integrity of Pakistan".

POLITICS REVIVING IN WEST PAKISTAN

Political figures had been holding small meetings and news conferences around West Pakistan for two weeks or more, asking that the military government turn over at least some power to the people and their elected representatives.

Parties of both the right and the left in West Pakistan wanted a restoration of popular government because they had no effective power now and could only gain from a return to conventional political life.

In recent days officials of the Pakistan People's Party and of lesser groups had been quietly seeking the support of former notables of the Awami League, which was banned when the military action began.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
