Genocide issue will be referred to UN body
2021-05-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/genocide-issue-will-be-referred-un-body-2087717

May 4, 1971

BANGLADESH GOVT AMASSES EVIDENCE OF GENOCIDE

The Bangladesh government decided to refer to the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations the question of genocide in the newborn republic. A spokesman of the Bangladesh mission in Kolkata said documentary evidence of the genocide was being collected for submission to the Commission. These evidence would include photographs and eye-witness accounts brought by refugees to India.

SPECIAL TRIBUNAL TO TRY BANGABANDHU FOR HIGH TREASON

The Pakistan government decided to set up a three-member special tribunal to try Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman for high treason, reported a Karachi daily. The tribunal would consist of a senior judge of the Supreme Court, a judge of the Punjab High Court and a senior military officer of the rank of a major general. The paper said the trial would be held in Rawalpindi.

US WILL JOIN RELIEF MISSION IF UN ORGANISES IT

The US was willing to join the framework of international assistance organised by the United Nations in providing relief to Bangladesh refugees flowing into India, according to state department spokesman Charles Bray. He hoped that such help could quickly be organised. About the food situation in Bangladesh, he asserted that there was enough food stocks there but the problem was one of total breakdown of the distribution system.

Senator Edward Kennedy urged the Nixon Administration to organise a mercy mission and airlift it to Bangladesh. He further said news reports to his sub-committee on refugees confirm a deteriorating situation with a threat of famine for millions.

NO REHABILITATION PLAN: INDIRA

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi told newsmen today that the Government of India had no intention of rehabilitating the refugees who had come from Bangladesh on a permanent basis. She further said her government had been trying to get some international organisation to help in the work but there had not been much response. However, they would be approached further, she added.

US TANKS USED IN PAKISTAN

The US state department acknowledged that the central government of Pakistan had used US-supplied tanks and jets in putting down the "rebellion by breakaway East Pakistan". But it said Pakistan was under no obligation to consult with the United States on the transfer of the equipment from one part of the country to the other. The action by Pakistan's central government was taken despite secret diplomatic pressure from the United States, according to the state department. The statements were made by David M. Abshire, assistant secretary of state for congressional relations, to four senators who had asked for information on the status of US military and economic aid to Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
