Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra artiste Anup Bhattacharya no more
2021-05-06T21:25:39+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/news/swadhin-bangla-betar-kendra-artiste-anup-bhattacharya-no-more-2089401

Freedom fighter and Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra artiste Anup Bhattacharya passed away today at the capital's Asgor Ali Medical College Hospital 7:30 pm today. He was 77 years old, and was suffering from various old age ailments.

His son-in-law, Sudip Chakroborthy, confirmed the news to The Daily Star.

The legendary artiste had long suffered from lung problems, diabetes and high blood pressure.

"His only regret was that he did not get his due respect from the authorities regarding his Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra artiste status," said Sudip. Anup Bhattacharya, had regularly received an honorarium from the government for his role during the liberation war. However, due to missing a meeting held in Zakiganj, his honorarium was cancelled. "He never received the notification letter for the meeting, Even two days ago, he had expressed his grief at this frankly insulting gesture."

Born in Zakiganj, Sylhet, Anup Bhattacharya's musical career began in the 60's, as a singer at the Rajshahi station of the then Radio Pakistan.

He had worked as a composer and music director at Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra during the Liberation War. His voice is present in everpresent liberation songs including "Teer Hara Ei Dheu-er Sagor", "Rokto Diye Naam Likhhechhi", "Purbo Digonte" and "Nongor Tolo Tolo".

Later in his career, Bhattacharya emerged as a composer with immensely popular songs like "Baishakhi Megher Kachhey Jol Cheye", "Shuk Pakhi Rey Pinjira Tor", "Ekattorer Juddher Diney", "Pakhi Janey Na Keno Kandey", "Lalon Tomar Aarshinagar" and "Notey Gachh Moraeye Na", among more than 100 songs in his illustrious career.

Anup Bhattacharya had worked with names like Andrew Kishore, Mitali Mukherji, Rafiqul Alam, Dilruba Khan and Samina Chowdhury, among many others. He is considered to be one of the forerunners of Bangladesh's 'adhunik' genre.

The artiste, whose last rites will take place in Dhaka tomorrow, is survived by two daughters.
