‘Our struggle is not opposed to Islam’
2021-05-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/our-struggle-not-opposed-islam-2095305

May 20, 1971

INTERVIEW WITH AHM KAMARUZZAMAN

The Pakistan military junta has failed to restore civil administration in areas under its control in Bangladesh despite desperate efforts and it would never be able to do so, Bangladesh Home Minister AHM Kamaruzzaman told UNI in an interview published in the Hindustan Times today.

"The former civil servants of Bangladesh have vowed not to support the occupational force, for every citizen in Bangladesh considers the army action as an attack on his legitimate right to live as a free citizen of a free nation," said Kamaruzzaman.

If the Pakistani claim of normalcy in Bangladesh was true why was it still barring international organisations and bodies from Bangladesh, he asked. The Pakistani rulers were concocting stories to hide the real state of affairs in Bangladesh from the outside world.

"They know if any impartial body is allowed into Bangladesh, the mischievous propaganda and designs will stand revealed."

Regarding Pakistani propaganda that the troops had to intervene to put down racial and communal riots, he said the Liberation War was not against any religion.

"Our struggle is not opposed to Islam. The value and teachings of Islam shall be preserved. The values and teachings of other religions shall also be protected. We envisage a state which is free of exploitation. Our aim is to establish an egalitarian and classless society in which there will be no barrier between man and man, irrespective of his caste, colour and creed," Kamaruzzaman added.

The home minister further said, "Those who accept Bangladesh as their motherland and are connected with the Liberation War are our brothers. Those who are playing the role of quislings, whatever their religion, are our enemies and the enemies of Bangladesh. They shall be tried by people's courts."

Kamaruzzaman reiterated, "The only solution to Pakistan's difficulties in Bangladesh is to withdraw its troops and transfer power to the people of Bangladesh. The Bengalis of Bangladesh could never form one nation with the people of West Pakistan by any political and economic standard."

GUERILLA FIGHT RIGHT INTO DHAKA CITY

Pakistan tacitly admitted that Bangladesh freedom fighters had carried out a guerilla fight right into Dhaka city. Radio Pakistan today broadcast a warning by martial law authorities threating exemplary punishment to the fighters whom the radio described as "saboteurs".

In another press note the martial law authority asked all the teachers of colleges and universities in East Pakistan to join their respective educational institutions by June 1, 1971. Classes would start from August 2, 1971, it declared.

FRANCE, UK NOT TO AID PAKISTAN

A Franco-British agreement against supply of arms in any form and of financial and economic aid to the Yahya Khan regime was reached on the eve of the Franco-British Summit talks in Paris, reported the Hindusthan Standard today.

CHINESE PRESENCE IN PAKISTAN IS MORE NOTICEABLE

The Chinese presence in Pakistan became increasingly noticeable as new aid from Peking was announced, newspapers praised Chinese policies and columns of blue-uniformed Chinese officials marched through airport waiting rooms.

Last week China pledged a new interest-free loan to Pakistan of about $20 million.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
