Yahya’s appeal for US support
2021-05-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/yahyas-appeal-us-support-2097637

May 24, 1971

YAHYA'S LETTER TO NIXON

In a letter dated May 24, 1971, Pakistan President Yahya Khan expressed his gratitude towards American President Richard Nixon and said, "It is gratifying to learn that you share our view that it is to no one's advantage to permit the situation in East Pakistan to be internationalised and that any foreign intervention in this situation could create new problems and compound the difficulty of securing an ultimate settlement."

Yahya reaffirmed his resolve to transfer power to a civilian government at the earliest possible time. He said, "For this purpose, I have initiated, once again, consultations with political leaders and elected representatives of the people."

Yahya accused India of arranging a hijacking incident and said, "[Through this] India sought justification for its decision to ban overflights of our aircraft. Thus, a situation was created which not only imposed a heavy financial burden on Pakistan but also made the task of a political settlement between the two wings of our country more difficult.

"Our plans for national reconstruction cannot materialise so long as India follows a policy of open and constant interference in our internal affairs. It was not a matter of mere coincidence that the present crisis in Indo-Pakistan relations started when Pakistan was at the threshold of ushering in a democratically elected government," Yahya continued. He emphasised on persuading Indira Gandhi to show a more helpful attitude.

As to the refuge problem, Yahya said, "It is most unfortunate that due to disturbed conditions and for other reasons, a large number of people left their homes in East Pakistan and crossed into India. Their migration has created a human problem which should be treated as such… I have, therefore, in a public statement urged the law abiding citizens of East Pakistan who were compelled to migrate, to return to their homes and resume their normal duties. They would not only be welcome but would be afforded necessary protection and assistance by my government."

Yahya urged Nixon to take measures to solve the refugee problem and the related issues. "[It] would be an act of historical significance," concluded Yahya.

DESPITE OFFICIAL ASSERTIONS,

REPORTS TELL OF FIGHTING

Despite official descriptions of normality in East Pakistan, guerrilla activity and the army crackdown continued, reported the New York Times.

The Pakistani army had been able to widen its control of vital installations and major towns and cities. But guerrilla and terrorist activity by Bangalee "insurgents" -- buttressed by Bangalee non-cooperation in general -- prevented the army from establishing an effective civil administration in most of East Pakistan, added the American daily.

It further said Bangladesh forces continued to destroy rail lines and bridges. They were also seizing barges and destroying cargoes of jute, whose export provided the biggest share of Pakistan's foreign exchange.

The Pakistan army, reported the New York Times, continued to carry out bloody reprisals against civilians wherever the "insurgents" were active. The particular targets were said to be young men, intellectuals, members of the now-banned Awami League and minority Hindus.

It further wrote that the Pakistan army had been enlisting, and in many cases arming, anti-Awami League segments of the population to try to suppress the Bangalee "insurgence". These minority segments included non-Bangalee Bihari Muslims and supporters of traditionalist, religiously oriented parties.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
