Meghalaya border shelled
2021-05-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/meghalaya-border-shelled-2098349

May 25, 1971

SWADHIN BANGLA BETAR KENDRA SHIFTED TO KOLKATA

On May 25, Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra was shifted to Calcutta where it started functioning the same day. With the arrival of new and experienced radio personnel from Dhaka, the centre became fully operative technically. Abdul Mannan MNA was entrusted with the task of organising the key communication wing of the exiled government.

NINE BSF MEN KILLED

Twenty-two persons, including nine Indian Border Security Force men, were killed today in heavy shelling by Pakistani troops in Dalu Sector in Meghalaya's Garo Hills district. Assam Chief Minister Mahendramohan Chowdhury told the assembly that the BSF had "successfully repulsed" Pakistani aggression in three different sectors of the Assam-Bangladesh border. He requested the Indian prime minister to take immediate action to clear the Pakistan army from the border areas and to safeguard the sanctity of the territory.

INDIA RAPS POWERS OVER BANGLADESH

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi accused the world powers of not doing enough about the war in East Pakistan and said India might have to take all means as might be necessary to ensure its own security.

She said more than 3.5 million refugees had fled from East Pakistan into India and that the influx was continuing at the rate of 60,000 a day, threatening to disrupt the Indian economy and drain the government's resources.

"I have pleaded with all countries to recognise this threat to peace on the subcontinent," she declared. "If the world does not take heed we shall be constrained to take all means as may be necessary to ensure our own security and for the preservation of the structure of social and economic life. I say this with full sense of responsibility," said Indira Gandhi.

Indian Defence Minister Jagjivan Ram said Pakistani troops had crossed the Indian border seven times since the trouble began in East Pakistan on March 25. There had been 43 incidents of firing across the border and 11 violations of air space. Instructions had been given that intruding aircraft were to be shot down if they disobeyed orders to return to Pakistan territory, he added.

NOBODY SEEKS WAR: YAHYA

Pakistan President Yahya Khan said "nobody wants war" since it would solve nothing. Yahya said he believed Indira Gandhi did not want a war despite her recent statements.

Yahya told journalists that he would announce a plan within a few weeks to turn over governmental power in Pakistan to representatives elected last December. He also offered amnesty to members of Awami League who did not commit crimes in the initial fighting last March in East Pakistan.

He said US President Richard Nixon had offered Pakistan aid in what Yahya called a "warmhearted, kind, personal letter of friendship" received on May 23, 1971.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
