Nixon asks India, Pakistan to show maximum restraint
2021-05-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/nixon-asks-india-pakistan-show-maximum-restraint-2100185

May 28, 1971

NIXON'S LETTER TO INDIRA GANDHI

In a letter dated May 28, 1971, American President Richard Nixon urged Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to continue to act with maximum restraint.

"I am also deeply concerned that the present situation not develop into a more widespread conflict in South Asia, either as a result of the refugee flow or through actions which might escalate the insurgency which may be developing in East Pakistan. The problems involved in this situation can and should be solved peacefully," said Nixon.

Nixon assured Indira Gandhi of continuing his government's effort to persuade Pakistan to ensure a peaceful political accommodation and restoration of conditions under which the refugee flow would stop and the refugees would be able to return to their homes.

"I feel that these approaches were at least in part behind President Yahya's press conference on May 24 and especially his public acceptance of international assistance, offer of amnesty to the refugees and commitment to transfer of power to elected representatives," added Nixon.

Nixon also pledged a generous contribution to the UNHCR relief fund for supporting the refugees who had taken shelter in India.

NIXON'S LETTER TO YAHYA

In another letter dated May 28, 1971, Nixon expressed his satisfaction to Pakistan President Yahya Khan over the latter's positive response to the suggestions made by the US to restore peace in East Pakistan. "I was gratified to learn of your statesmanlike decision to accept formally the assistance of the United Nations in organizing an international humanitarian relief effort for the people of East Pakistan and of your letter to Secretary General U Thant confirming that decision. I have also noted with satisfaction your public declaration of amnesty for the refugees and commitment to transfer power to elected representatives. I am confident that you will turn these statements into reality," said Nixon.

The US president expressed his particular concern for the people of the coastal area who had been affected by the cyclonic disaster in November, 1970. "I can assure you that my government and countrymen are already prepared not only to resume humanitarian relief efforts in this special area but to extend them to the rest of East Pakistan under the aegis of the United Nations in accordance with arrangements now under discussion," added Nixon.

He also urged Yahya to continue to exercise restraint both along Pakistan's borders with India and the country's general relations with that country. "I believe, therefore, that it is absolutely vital for the maintenance of peace in the Subcontinent to restore conditions in East Pakistan conducive to the return of refugees from Indian territory as quickly as possible," emphasised Nixon.

RESISTANCE FIGHT CONTINUES

Bangladeshi freedom fighters blew off Kalikapur Railway Bridge near Comilla today. On the same day, the Pakistan army brought a company of soldiers at Raghunathpur, near the Comilla-Brahmanbaria road. Freedom fighters ambushed the enemy unit and several Pakistani soldiers and an officer were killed.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
