Battle of Bhomra
2021-05-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/battle-bhomra-2100781

May 29, 1971

TAJUDDIN'S INTERVIEW

Bangladesh Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad said he failed to understand how the democratic governments of the world could support the dictatorial regime of Pakistan, which was crushing the democratic aspirations of the people of Bangladesh.

Tajuddin told a foreign correspondent in an interview, broadcast by the Swadhin Bangla Kendra: "We wanted to establish the democratic rights of the people of Pakistan and to that end, we tried our best. We made all peaceful attempts in this direction but Yahya's army, most shamelessly cracked down on the unarmed people of Bangladesh. We had no other alternative but to proclaim independence for the 75 million democratic Bangalees of Bangladesh."

The radio station, quoting Awami League leaders, said "Bangladesh is a free and sovereign country today and there is no scope for talks."

The AL leaders were commenting on a statement by the spokesman of the US state department about a formula suggested by an emissary of Pakistan President Yahya Khan for a settlement of the issue.

BHOMRA BATTLE

A heavy fight broke out today between Bangladesh Liberation fighters and Pakistan army at Bhomra, Satkhira. Mahbub Uddin Ahmed Bir Bikram, then chief of police in the subdivision of Jessore, fought valiantly in the battle. He shares his memory in the following words: "It was already dawn and we took all-out preparation to attack the Pak army. Captain Salauddin of the East Bengal regiment was in charge of the company. I was the second-in-command of the troops in this operation.

"The enemies started moving forward. We kept monitoring their movement and kept changing our position to dodge the Pakistani forces.

"Whenever the enemies came inside our firing range, we opened fire. The enemies became disoriented and started to retreat. Freedom fighter Jabbar played a significant role in the battle.

"We were all in joyous mood after this initial victory. But around mid-day, we suddenly got information that Pakistani forces were coming back with a large contingent. We took position behind a thick wall and started firing targeting our enemies. Pak forces also launched counter fire. The battle went on for two hours, and finally the Pak army retreated. We had suffered four casualties: Subedar Jabbar, Subedar Samsul Huq, Abul Kashem, a member of Mujahid Bahini and Sepay Abdul Mannan. Some unofficial eye witness accounts estimated Pakiatani casualty at over 300."

KENNEDY ISSUES WARNING

Indifference by the US and other nations to millions of East Pakistani refugees is bringing the South Asia region "towards the brink of war", Senator Edward M. Kennedy charged today.

In a letter, Kennedy said reports to his subcommittee indicate that at least 3.5 million refugees had already crossed into India. Kennedy said: "Their number increases daily at a rate approaching 100,000 a day."

Senator Kennedy asked for stronger efforts by individual governments and by the United Nations to encourage political accommodation between the central Pakistan government and the "rebels" of East Pakistan. He called on the US to respond immediately to Pakistan's food, water and medical needs. Kennedy also urged the United States to take unilateral action to aid India's appeal for refugee assistance even if the UN continues to be unresponsive to India's requests.

THAILAND REFUSES TO GIVE FUEL

The Thai foreign ministry announced its inability to supply fuel to Pakistan for military purposes. It also expressed its desire not to get involved in the "internal problems" of Pakistan.

It was also reported that two Daphne-class submarines obtained by Pakistan from France are now on their way to Karachi.

REFUGEES HIT BY CHOLERA

Cholera claimed 150 lives in the past two days in border area refugee camps where tens of thousands of refugees had fled into India from the war in East Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
