Bhashani rules out any political settlement
2021-05-31T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bhashani-rules-out-any-political-settlement-2101901

May 31, 1971

BHASHANI'S PRESS CONFERENCE

Rejecting straightway the proposals for a political settlement of the issues involved in the present revolt against Yahya Khan in Bangladesh. Maulana Bhashani expressed surprise and resentment today at the total inaction on the part of socialist countries swearing in the name of liberation of the oppressed people. While speaking at a press conference, Bhashani placed facts before the newsmen to make it quite clear that the present conflict in Bangladesh was nothing but a revolt of the people against the continued exploitation by the rulers, feudal lords and bureaucracy of West Pakistan. Nothing but the acceptance of the demands for a sovereign independent state of Bangladesh would settle the issue. It was a revolution, he said, of the people and not "imported from any country, far less a socialist country."

He said that the revolution in Bangladesh was no less important than the revolution in China and Russia. "It is a total revolution by the people of Bangladesh and it is duty of the people and the governments of all countries to support this revolution, "said Bhashani.

Maulana Bhashani was thankful to the people and the government of India for the correct attitude taken towards Bangladesh and the relief extended to the lakhs of refugees who were taking shelter in India.

NO COMPROMISE BASED ON UNITED PAKISTAN

No compromise based on a united Pakistan was possible after the West Pakistan Army's genocide in Bangladesh and any move from any quarters to start negotiation for a political settlement of the Bangladesh issue would be rejected by the Bangladesh government and the people. The unequivocal stand of the Bangladesh government was made clear to newsmen in New Delhi by Amjadul Haque, press attaché of the Bangladesh government in New Delhi. Amjadul said, "Bangladesh is a free and sovereign country today and there is no scope for a political settlement of the Bangladesh question."

"Bangladesh is at war. It is a total war of the total population against the colonial military regime of West Pakistan and the valiant people of Bangladesh are bound to emerge victorious as a free and sovereign nation," added Amjadul.

PAKISTAN EASES CENSORSHIP

The Pakistan government said today that it had decided to lift immediately censorship on all news dispatches for abroad. Censorship was imposed by President Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan on March 26 after he had ordered military crackdown in East Pakistan. Censorship within the country would apparently continue.

500 PAK SOLDIERS KILLED

About 500 Pakistani soldiers were killed in encounters with the Mukti Fouj in Bangladesh during the past two days, according to a Mukti Fouj source, reported UNI. The source said that the Mukti Fouj had recaptured the Chatak Industrial Town. The Mukti Fouj wiped out two battalions of Pak troops in Gayeshpur in Khulna district. They also seized a gun boat near the Sundarbans and four army jeeps in Cumilla.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
