Bangladesh delegation addresses Indian parliament
2021-06-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/bangladesh-delegation-addresses-indian-parliament-2102501

June 1, 1971

A FIGHT TO THE FINISH

The Provisional Government of Bangladesh today ruled out any political settlement with the West Pakistanis. Home Minister AM Kamaruzzaman issued a statement to the press which categorically rejected President Yahya Khan's offer of an amnesty. It's a fight to the finish, he said.

Kamaruzzaman told journalists that the president's word would never be trusted in East Pakistan again after he unleashed the army on the night of March 25. According to the Bangalee leader, Yahya had actually accepted Bangalees' demands only the day before and had promised to announce this on the radio.

"Instead of doing so he ordered his troops to wipe out the Bangalee race," Kamaruzzaman said. "To us in Bangladesh, the name of General Yahya Khan does not connote a normal human being. It connotes a bloodthirsty murderer, a betrayer and the disintegrator of Pakistan. After what has been done, the killing of innocent children and citizens, the raping of our women folk, it is impossible for the people of Bangladesh to live under the same roof as Pakistan."

PLEA FOR RECOGNITION

Three legislators from Bangladesh, Phani Bhushan Majumdar, Noorjehan Murshed and Shah Moazzem Hossain, who addressed the MPs today at the Indian parliament, made an impassioned plea for recognition of Bangladesh by the Government of India. The three legislators put before the Indian parliamentarians the background of the Bangladesh issue, its exploitation by the West Pakistani rulers, the discrimination meted out to the people of East Pakistan and finally the genocide and the reign of terror let loose by the Pakistan army on the innocent and unarmed people.

Phani Bhushan Majumdar, leader of the Bangladesh delegation, said perhaps the Government of Indian wanted to avoid conflict with Pakistan and international complications. "God forbid, if Bangladesh went down fighting the economy of India would be affected adversely," he added.

Phani Majumdar also urged the Indian MPs to take up the question of release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at every national and international forum. He apprehended that danger might come to Bangabandhu's life.

Noorjehan Murshed referred to the talk of "political settlement" and said that if there was to be a political settlement it would have to be on their terms. She made clear what their terms would be after hundreds of "My Lai" killings in Bangladesh by the West Pakistan army. It was complete withdrawal of West Pakistani army and the liberation of Bangladesh.

The Bangladesh delegation also met Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and sought support for their provisional Bangalee government.

SWADHIN BANGLA BETAR CLAIMS GUERILLA WINS

Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra today claimed that the West Pakistan army had been routed in several areas by guerrillas of the liberation army. Over 500 regular troops had been killed and a gunboat sunk. The radio station went on to say that the Sylhet area in the northern provinces had been liberated, three major railway bridges destroyed and General Yahya Khan's troops under heavy pressure.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
