No room for compromise with Pakistan: Tajuddin
2021-06-02T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/no-room-compromise-pakistan-tajuddin-2103161

June 2, 1971

TAJUDDIN'S INTERVIEW WITH ALL INDIA RADIO

Bangladesh Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad categorically declared today that "there is no room for compromise (with West Pakistan) within the framework of Pakistan".

"Bangladesh is sovereign and independent and we shall defend its separate and free entity at any cost," he added.

In an interview with All India Radio Tajuddin reiterated, "Our irrevocable commitment to a policy of friendship for all, especially our neighbours ... irrespective of variations in the response of world powers to our present difficulties.

"Beyond this it is not possible to define too rigidly the foreign policy of a two-month state," Tajuddin said in reply to a question.

He added, "There are encouraging developments and no final judgement need be made on the long-term developments."

Asked about the Pakistan government's claim that Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had been taken to Dhaka and he had urged people to cooperate with the army, Tajuddin said, "We do not know where exactly Sheikh Sahib has been detained by the Pakistan Government but the claim that he has urged the people to cooperate with the Army of Pakistan should be rejected with utmost contempt. The claim is preposterous."

NEW AID TO PAKISTANI REFUGEES

The US was reported today to be planning to contribute $10 million to $15 million more to care for Bangladeshi refugees fleeing into India.

In addition, reliable sources said today that four C‐130 transports at Pope Air Force Base, near Fayetteville, NC, were awaiting orders to fly to India to help move up to 50,000 refugees from the overcrowded Tripura area on the Bangladesh‐Indian border area to camps in Assam, in northeast India. The airlift is expected to cost $750,000 and require a month.

The new financing and the airlift reflect a recent White House decision to underwrite up to half of the overall cost of caring for the refugees for the next 90 days. A half‐million dollars in cash from this fund was immediately turned over to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

Meanwhile, the Agency for International Development was reported to have questioned the Pakistani government about the apparent seizure by the Pakistani army of 50 United States military boats sent to East Pakistan last winter to help distribute supplies to cyclone victims.

CHOLERA DEATHS REPORTED

More than 1,000 Bangladeshi refugees died from cholera in the last six days in Nadia district of West Bengal state, district officials said today.

The officials of the district, which borders on Bangladesh and was about 60 miles north of Calcutta, said reports of other deaths were still coming in.

DHAKA UNIVERSITY REOPENED

Pakistan claimed today that Dhaka University and other government colleges in Dhaka had been reopened. Radio Pakistan said more than 80 percent of the teaching staff had turned up for work. The Provincial Martial Law Authorities ordered the reopening of all private colleges on July 1, 1971.

BHUTTO'S NEW STAND

Pakistan People's Party Chairman ZA Bhutto demanded immediate transfer of power to the elected representatives of the people, reported Radio Pakistan. He added that political problems could be solved by politicians only. This was in contrast to Bhutto's earlier stand that no useful purpose would be served by an immediate transfer of power.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
