A conversation with Yahya Khan
2021-06-05T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/conversation-yahya-khan-2105057

June 5, 1971

US AMBASSADOR CALLS ON YAHYA KHAN

In a telegram sent to the US State Department on June 5, 1971, US Ambassador in Pakistan Joseph Farland provided a detailed account of his conversation with Pakistan President Yahya Khan. The meeting was held on the same day.

During the 50-minute conversation they discussed, among other subjects, the general refugee situation and the multitudinous problems which it presented.

Farland introduced the subject by underscoring President Nixon's satisfaction with the May 24 statement of Yahya. Noting that Washington was encouraged by the Government of Pakistan's plan to set up refugee reception centres in East Pakistan, he expressed the hope that these centers would quickly be activated.

Farland pointed out that it would be most helpful if Yahya would specifically indicate that Hindus would also be welcomed back, suggesting that this could be done by emphasising publicly that all bona fide refugees regardless of religious origin could and should return to their homes. Farland suggested that this type of pronouncement would be favourably received by the Indian government and should also have a salutary impact on world opinion.

Yahya's immediate answer was to the effect that his May 24 statement was all inclusive and that there was no differentiation between Muslims and Hindus. He added, however, that he had no objection whatsoever in making a statement as suggested, and that he would most certainly do so.

Farland went on to note that the flow of refugees continued and that this flow is symptomatic of the serious situation in East Pakistan. He pointed out that the embassy continued to receive reports of Hindu villages being attacked by the army, that fear was pervasive, and that until this situation changed the refugees will continue to cross over into India.

And Farland reiterated the US government's concern that at some point the Hindu exodus, if not checked, could lead to a military clash with India.

A DAY'S EARNINGS FOR BANGLADESH

The working people of Hungary contributed a day's earnings to a non-official fund launched in that country for relief of Bangladesh refugees in India. Political and cultural organisations running the campaign hoped to send the first consignment of tents, blankets, medicines and foodstuff to India within six weeks to be followed by another in August.

CHOLERA TOLL REACHES 8,000

The death toll in the cholera epidemic sweeping through four million East Pakistani refugees in India's West Bengal state reached 8,000. Health ministry officials in New Delhi said the toll could be as high as that, but no precise statistics were available.

With a catastrophe on its hands, the Indian government continued its efforts to recruit international help and also to reassure the West Bengal government that it would not be left alone to face the problem.

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi visited West Bengal today for talks with the state government and said the central government in New Delhi had taken full responsibility for the care of refugees, who had fled from East Pakistan since the army began the attempt to crush the movement there.

UN CHILDRENS FUND TO SEND RELIEF SUPPLIES

The United Nations Children's Fund chartered a plane to fly 30 tonnes of relief supplies to refugees fleeing from East Pakistan to India, United Nations sources said.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
