Pakistan is dead: Syed Nazrul
2021-06-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/pakistan-dead-syed-nazrul-2105605

June 6, 1971

PRECONDITIONS FOR SETTLEMENT

Syed Nazrul Islam, acting president of Bangladesh, today spelt out four preconditions for a political settlement of the Bangladesh issue. In a 45-minute broadcast from the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra, Syed Nazrul Islam said that the conditions were: 1) unconditional release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, 2) withdrawal of the invading West Pakistani Army from the soil of Bangladesh, 3) recognition of the Sovereign Republic of Bangladesh, 4) compensation for the losses suffered by the people during the two and half months of barbarous atrocities by the West Pakistan Army.

Syed Nazrul Islam said that many countries -- big and small -- had talked about a political settlement in Bangladesh. But nobody had specifically stated their formulae. On behalf of the Bangladesh Government, he made it clear to these countries that if they had thought of a settlement within the framework of the so-called Pakistan, they would be grossly mistaken. "Pakistan is dead and she cannot be revived. Free Bangladesh is now a reality. On behalf of the Bangladesh Government, I want to make it amply clear that the 75 million people of Bangladesh will not accept any hotchpotch political settlement. We had wanted a settlement but after the horrifying night of March 25 the question of a settlement does not rise," said the acting President.

COMMANDOS KILL 250 TROOPS IN BANGLADESH

Commandos of the Mukti Fouj kept up their guerilla activities on almost all fronts in Bangladesh and killed 250 Pak troops during the last few days according to the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra. The freedom fighters killed 45 Pakistani troops in two encounters in the West Dinajpur sector today. At Teliapara, a number of Army vehicles were destroyed in explosion of mines laid by the Mukti Fouj on the road. More than 24 troops were killed in the explosion. The West Pakistani Army had started frenzied operations in Dhaka to check guerilla activities. During curfew hours, the soldiers cordoned off a particular area and conducted house to house searches. A large number of checkpoints had been set up by the Pakistani Army throughout Dhaka city. Pedestrians were thoroughly searched at these posts and vehicles were also not spared. Most of the streets remained deserted. Curfew was still in force in Dhaka.

AMERICA, BRITAIN WITHDRAWING DIPLOMATS FROM E. PAKISTAN

The United States and Britain were withdrawing senior diplomats from Dhaka, foreign diplomatic sources said today.

American Consul General Archer K. Blood left for Washington June 3, 1971 and would not return, they said. Britain's deputy high commissioner, Frank Sargent would leave for London a week later they said. Neither had completed a normal tour of duty.

British sources would make no comment on the move of Sargent, who took up his post in Dhaka late last year. Blood was thrown into controversy following the Pakistan army's March 25 crackdown of the Bangladesh movement.

INDIA APPEALS IN MOSCOW

India's Foreign Minister, Swaran Singh, arrived in Moscow today, his first stop on a six‐nation tour to tell the world that India cannot cope with the influx of four million East Pakistanis fleeing across her borders.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
