2 largest currency denominations withdrawn
2021-06-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/2-largest-currency-denominations-withdrawn-2106257

June 7, 1971

PAKISTAN WITHDRAW 500- AND 100-RUPEE BILLS

The Pakistani government removed from circulation today part of the nation's currency in an effort to check the economic effects of looting from banks in East Pakistan.

The two largest denominations of Pakistani money, 500- and 100-rupee notes, worth respectively $106 and $21 at the legal rate of exchange, were recalled.

Also taken out of circulation were any other bank notes overprinted with the slogans of the Bangladesh movement.

President Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan said recently that $100 million in rupees had been taken from banks in East Pakistan by militant Bangalee "separatists" in March and April.

Tonight, the government said this money, if it remained within the Pakistani economy, would be likely to have an inflationary effect. It asked that 500- and 100-rupee notes be turned in to government banks for checking of serial numbers in the next three days.

INDEPENDENCE WILL DEFINITELY COME: BHASANI

Maulana Bhasani said the people of Bangladesh would continue their present struggle as long as it was required, no matter whether they received cooperation and assistance from other countries. In a statement issued today Bhasani said all parts of Bangladesh were smeared with the blood of one million Bangalees and through this stream of blood, the independence of Bengal would definitely come. That was why the people were fighting the West Pakistani army staking their life and property.

He said this struggle was not only for realising the political rights of the people but also to remove economic disparity. Hence this fight would not end in any compromise.

PRINCE AGA KHAN MEETS YAHYA

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan today conferred with President Yahya Khan in Rawalpindi. Prince Aga Khan, who arrived in Rawalpindi on June 6, 1971 on a three-day visit at the invitation of the Pakistan government, would visit Bangladesh.

Earlier, his office announced that Prince Aga Khan would discuss possible arrangements for the return of the East Pakistani refugees who fled to India.  Repatriation was the "most desirable solution to the problem from the humanitarian point of view," said the announcement.

FAO APPEALS FOR AID

The director general of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) appealed today for additional assistance to relieve "the very serious humanitarian problem" raised by the recent war in East Pakistan. Speaking at the opening session of the FAO Council in Rome, Dr Addeke H Boerma declared that the requests for emergency food aid by Pakistan and India were "beyond the resources" of his organisation and the World Food Program.

LOADING OF CTG-BOUND SHIPS STOPPED

Port workers in Kolkata stopped today two Chittagong-bound ships -- London Advocate and Manipur. The boycott was in compliance with a directive from the Port Sramik Union. The cargo included transformers, automotive parts, naphtha, tractor parts, drugs and military goods.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
