Yahya delays plan for power transfer
2021-06-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/yahya-delays-plan-power-transfer-2110397

June 14, 1971

YAHYA SAID TO DELAY PLAN FOR CIVIL RULE

Pakistan President Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan postponed the announcement of his plan for the transfer of power to a civilian government.  The president, who rules by martial authority, said May 24 that he would announce the plan in two to three weeks' time.

The Chairman of the Pakistan People's Party Zulfikar All Bhutto, who met President Yahya today, said the delay was due to the Government's preoccupation with the budget, to be announced later this month.

Bhutto reiterated his demand for an "early and effective" transfer of power to the elected representatives, both at the national and provincial levels. He said Yahya was sincere about transferring power, but "a coterie of civil servants, defeated politicians and big business" had been trying to impede the process.

MUKTI FOUJ ACTIVE ON WIDE FRONT IN BANGLADESH

The Mukti Fouj guerillas were active on a wide front in Bangladesh as the Pakistani troops continued their atrocities on unarmed civilians. In Chauddagram, Comilla, a group of freedom fighters under the command of Khaled Mosharraf ambushed Pakistani forces. Pakistan army suffered heavy losses and had to retreat. There were also incidents of encounters between the two forces in various parts of Bangladesh, including Kasba, Fakirhat and Khulna.

On the night of June 14, guerillas of the Hemayat Bahini attacked a Pakistan army base at Kotalipara. The number of casualties on the Pakistan side was 50. Freedom fighter Ibrahim embraced martyrdom in this operation.

YAHYA ADMITS 'HARSH, SWIFT' ARMY ACTION

Jill Knight, a British Conservative member of parliament said that Pakistan President Yahya had admitted to her that his army had acted "harshly and swiftly" in East Pakistan, reported Reuters. Knight in a dispatch to the British Conservative newspaper The Daily Telegraph said she and two other MPs -- James Kilfedder and James Tinn -- had talked with the president for one and a half hours on June 12 night. She further informed that Yahya had stated that he did not want to become known as the man who destroyed Pakistan.

CHINA WILL GIVE PAKISTAN AID WORTH $70M

China agreed to extend $70 million worth of commodity assistance immediately to help Pakistan meet some of her urgent import requirements.

SADAT SUPPORTS PAK INTEGRITY

Egyptian President Anwar Sadat today reiterated his country's support to the integrity of Pakistan. Recalling his two earlier meetings with Yahya Khan, Sadat said he looked forward to continued cooperation between the two countries.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
