Senator urges Nixon to halt Pakistani ship
2021-06-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/senator-urges-nixon-halt-pakistani-ship-2115473

June 22, 1971

KENNEDY REPORTS ON PAKISTAN ARMS

The office of Senator Edward M Kennedy said today the state department had informed the senator that two Pakistani freighters now en route from New York to Karachi were carrying ammunition for the Pakistani armed forces.

A spokesman said Kennedy was advised by a ranking state department official that the Pakistani freighter Sunderbans carried munitions and other military equipment sold to Pakistan under the US Foreign Military Sales programme as well as through commercial suppliers.

Kennedy was told, the spokesman said, that the freighter Padma carried munitions along with spare parts and other military-use items bought commercially by Pakistan and licensed for export by the state department.

The state department refused to comment on Kennedy's report. A spokesman said "we do not know what there is aboard the ship" and announced that the state department and the Bureau of Customs had launched a joint investigation to determine the nature of the Padma's cargo.

In New Delhi, Indian Foreign Minister Swaran Singh said today that if the United States was shipping munitions to Pakistan, "it is a clear departure from the assurances given me".

SEN CHURCH URGES NIXON TO HALT AMRS SHIPMENT

Senator Frank Church urged President Richard Nixon in a letter to order the Coast Guard to intercept the freighter Padma, which left New York on June 21, to prevent the delivery of military equipment to Pakistan. He said if this could not be accomplished, the United States should seek Canada's co-operation in halting the ship. The Padma's first port of call is Montreal.

REFUGEE PROBLEM NOT JUST A MATTER OF CHARITY: INDIRA GANDHI

The international community should concentrate on all aspects of the Pakistani refugee problem, not only relief aid, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said in an interview on the Italian Television today. She added that India was bearing the brunt of the burden although it was one of the poorest countries in the world, but the situation was not simply a matter of charity.

"Future peace is at stake along with stability in that part of the world. If there is no peaceful stability, I believe there will be repercussions on the rest of the world," she said. There was already huge unemployment, she added, and work could not be given to non-Indian nationals.

BANGLADESH CABINET MEETS

Cabinet meeting of the exiled Bangladesh government was held today. The members discussed various issues including war strategies and selection and training of freedom fighters. It may be noted that the cabinet used to meet regularly on Monday and Friday.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
