Abetting repression
2021-06-23T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/news/abetting-repression-2116213

June 23, 1971

BANGLADESH GOVT HAILS AID PAKISTAN BODY'S DECISION

Bangladesh Home Minister AHM Kamaruzzaman welcomed today the decision of the Aid Pakistan Consortium to withhold further aid until there was a political settlement of the Bangladesh issue.

"In my opinion, the consortium could not have taken a better decision and the people of Bangladesh expect it to stop further aid until the occupation army is withdrawn from their territories," said Kamaruzzaman.

Any aid to Pakistan at this time would have been diverted to inhuman and barbarous activities, he added.

Regarding a political settlement, the home minister wanted to make it clear that the emotional ties or bonds of the people of Bangladesh with West Pakistan "have completely broken down after what has happened since March 25".

Kamaruzzaman, who returned from a weeklong tour of training camps of Bangladeshi freedom fighters, called for an unrelenting battle against the Pakistan army and their collaborators. They were enemies of the people who had to be fought till they were physically wiped out, he said.

ARMS SHIPMENT CRITICISED

The New York Times in an editorial titled "Abetting repression" vehemently criticised the US government today for continuing supply of arms and ammunitions to Pakistan. In the latest incident, a Pakistani freighter sailed from New York on June 22, 1971 bearing military equipment from the US defence department's excess stocks sold to Pakistan under state department licence. Another ship bearing American military equipment for Pakistan had sailed from this port in May, 1971. According to the bills of lading, equipment for the earlier shipment was delivered at a New York dock on the same date that the state department sent its letter to the senate committee saying no deliveries were scheduled.

"These shipments," wrote The New York Times, "represent a breach of faith with the American public, with Congress and with a friendly foreign power."

It further said, "They serve further to undermine the credibility of the United States Government. And they put the United States in the position of abetting an act of repression that is not only morally repugnant but which constitutes a serious threat to this country's own long-term interest in peace and democratic development on the Indian subcontinent."

ARRESTS OF BANGALEES REPORTED

Reports spread through Dhaka today that a large number of Bangalees—some reports put the figures as high as 400—had been arrested by the army during the night.

WAR-AFFECTED AREAS INSPECTED

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said today that he had made helicopter inspections of areas disrupted by civil strife in East Pakistan and had found that "life is slowly returning to normal".

The commissioner, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, warned, however, that massive relief and rehabilitation support was needed in the affected areas.

He said that the $45 million given or pledged by governments to care for East Pakistani refugees now in India had been used up and that the Indian authorities expected they would need far more than the $175 million estimated earlier to cover a six‐month period.

INDIA ASKS US TO CLARIFY REPORT ON AID TO PAKISTAN

The United States charge d'affaires in New Delhi, Gallen L Stone, was called to the foreign ministry today for clarification of a report in The New York Times that two Pakistani ships had sailed from American ports carrying United States military equipment, including aircraft and spare parts for army vehicles.

Indian Foreign Minister Swaran Singh, who returned early today after a visit to six world capitals, said the contents of the report were "contrary to assurances" that he had from American officials in Washington that military aid would not be provided to Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
