Yahya’s plan a cruel joke: Muzaffar
2021-07-02T01:57:43+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahyas-plan-cruel-joke-muzaffar-2121756

July 2, 1971

NAP (WALI) REJECTS YAHYA'S CONSTITUTIONAL PLAN

Muzaffar Ahmed, president of the National Awami Party (Wali Group) rejected Yahya's plan to impose a government of Islamabad's choice on the people of Bangladesh. Talking to newsmen, he said, "Yahya's so-called constitutional plan is a cruel joke perpetrated on the 75 million people of Bangladesh against whom he has let loose his armed hordes.

"The political solution in Bangladesh will be enforced by the people of Bangladesh themselves, now united as never before, in the grim struggle for their self-determination," he declared.

YOUTH TRAINING CONTROL BOARD FORMED

The exiled Government of Bangladesh formed Youth Training Control Board to coordinate the activities of youth training camps. Professor Yusuf Ali was made the chairman of the board. Wing Commander Ahmed Reza played a key role in the coordination activities.

REPUBLICANS' MOVE TO STOP ARMS AID

Two Republican members of the US Congress announced that they would introduce a resolution in both Houses to have the US government stop all further shipments of military equipment to Pakistan. The joint resolution would seek to force the government to revoke licenses already granted for shipments of military items.

UN REFUSES TO EXPLAIN REPORTS

The United Nations refused today to explain the factual basis and the reports of its representatives in West Pakistan and East Pakistan on which the UNDP administration and the Secretary General U Thant concluded that work on UN developments projects could be resumed in East Pakistan. The refusal confirmed suspicions that the decisions were purely political.

BHUTTO CLAIMS HE CAN FORM GOVT

The Chairman of the Pakistan People's Party, ZA Bhutto, claimed that his party was in a position to form government in all the four provinces in West Pakistan. He told newsmen in Quetta that he was confident his party could form governments in Punjab and Sind on its own strength and coalition government in North-West Frontier Province and Baluchistan. "This would certainly get reflected at the centre," he said.

INDIAN STUDENTS PROTEST US ARMS

Nearly 1.5 million school and college students in the state of West Bengal stayed away from their classes today in protest against United States arms shipments to Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
