Freedom fighters will lead our future army: Kamaruzzaman
2021-07-03T01:51:40+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/freedom-fighters-will-lead-our-future-army-kamaruzzaman-2122291

July 3, 1971

KAMARUZZAMAN'S SPEECH AT TEKERHAT

Home Minister of the exiled Government of Bangladesh AHM Kamaruzzaman today visited the youth training camp at Tekerhat, Sunamganj. He addressed the young trainees and said, " If any of you have any doubt about the victorious outcome of this war with the modern well-equipped Pakistan army, I am telling you to always keep in mind that seven and a half crore of Bangalees are with you in this fight.

"We must remember nobody ever makes a gift to you of your freedom; you have to earn it. If we think somebody else will win our freedom for us, we shall commit utter folly. We must continue the fight for freedom. Maybe many will come forward to help. But the fight will have to be yours and mine," he added.

Referring to the struggle of Vietnam, the home minister said, "Written in blood before our eyes today is small Vietnam. She is not insignificant anymore, commanding infinite power she has inflicted the worst crisis on American imperialism with all its modern arms and equipment. The victory of Vietnam is certain; there will be no exception for us."

He inspired the young freedom fighters with the tale of heroic struggle of the Algerians who, said Kamaruzzaman, "under extreme … difficulty built up their strong liberation force through a government formed abroad, and freed their motherland from imperialism".

He further said, "The basis for the future army of the country will be you. Those who shall excel in the freedom fight, those who will prove themselves to be the finest fighters, they will give the leadership to our future army."

PAKISTAN SEEKS US BOMBERS DESPITE EMBARGO

Pakistan President Mohammad Yahya Khan asked the United States to sell Pakistan seven B57 reconnaissance bombers on June 9, three months after the government imposed a ban on all military sales to his country, diplomatic sources said today.

Even though Pakistan was near bankruptcy because of the war that erupted in East Pakistan in late March, Yahya apparently was willing to pay the $1.25 million that each of the sophisticated jet planes would cost, or a total of $8.75 million.

US state department officials, acknowledging Yahya's request, said it was being held in abeyance while the United States reviewed its entire military assistance programme to Pakistan.

OUTSIDE HELP NEXT TO NOTHING: INDIRA

India Prime Minister Indira Gandhi today regretted that though the Bangladesh issue was an international problem, no major help was coming from the international community. She said the help from outside was practically "next to nothing". But India was determined to face the problem with courage and confidence, she added.

BATTLE OF MOGUL HAT

Fifty guerillas today crossed the Dharla River and attacked a Pakistani CAMP at Mogulhat, Lalmonirhat. The Pakistani army was caught unawares and lost 12 of their soldiers. Three Bangladesh guerillas embraced martyrdom in the operation.

PAKISTAN SEVERES TIES WITH COMMONWEALTH SOCIETY

Pakistan declared today to severe ties with London's Royal Commonwealth Society temporarily. The Pakistani spokesperson criticised the Society for allowing the platform to be used against the interest of Pakistan. It may be mentioned here that earlier Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, in a speech given at the Society, urged the world to stop the genocide in Bangladesh.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
