Pakistani propaganda in USA
2021-07-08T05:37:56+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/pakistani-propaganda-usa-2124981

July 8, 1971

THINGS ARE 'NORMAL'

The Pakistan government brought a group of East Pakistanis ti New York in an effort to persuade the press and diplomats that things were "normal" in East Pakistan.

The East Pakistanis who came on behalf of the Pakistani government were: Nurul Islam, a judge of the Dhaka High Court, Sajjad Hussain, VC of Rajshahi University, Mohar Ali, a professor of Dhaka University and Din Mohammad, also from Dhaka University.

The basic line of their propaganda was that the Awami League was not representative of East Pakistan, but it won an electoral victory and moved thereafter to bring about secession through "terror tactics"; that refugee movement into India is not of the order that India was painting but of only those who fled East Bengal in the aftermath of the "terror" that the Awami League let loose after March 1, and whose return India was now preventing.

AWAMI LEADERS RULE OUT POLITICAL COMPROMISE

Over 300 elected representatives of Bangladesh reaffirmed their determination to carry on an unflinching struggle for the liberation of the country.

The Awami League members of the national and provincial assemblies, who met at a two-day conference on July 6 and 7, also ruled out the possibility of any political compromise, short of independence.

The Awami League leaders urged the world organisations and the big powers to force the West Pakistan military junta to release Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his family.

The meeting also condemned US arms supplies to Pakistan.

Those who addressed the conference included Tajuddin Ahmad, Khandaker Mushtaque Ahmed, besides a number of prominent Awami League leaders.

NO TRUTH IN STORY OF KILLING OF NON-BANGALEES

Dr AR Mallick, former VC of Chittagong University, told newsmen today in India that he was extremely sorry to learn that propaganda was carried on in India, particularly among the Urdu press, about the so-called mass killings of non-Bangalee Muslims by Bangalees in Bangladesh during the last few months.

Replying to questions of Urdu journalists, he said all such stories generally emanated from Karachi and the Urdu press was fed on such propaganda in India. This was Pakistan President Yahya Khan's nefarious game, he added.

Dr Mallick asked newsmen to scan all national and international papers to find out whether there was any riot or killing among civilians from the first of March to the fateful March 25 when Pakistani troops cracked down on poor helpless Bangalees.

CURFEW IN DHAKA

A curfew had been imposed on Dhaka since July 5 to check the movement and actions of Bangladeshi freedom fighters, following hand grenade attacks in New Market area of the city.

TWO BANGALEE ENVOYS ASK FOR ASYLUM IN FRANCE

Two Bangalee diplomats at the Pakistan embassy in Paris -- Mosharaf Hussain and Shauqat Ali -- asked the French government for political asylum. They informed that they were ordered to return to West Pakistan.

The diplomatic representative of the Bangladesh government in New Delhi Shehabuddin congratulated them on their "right and courageous decision".

In Calcutta, a spokesman of the foreign office of the Bangladesh government also praised them for their "choice of freedom from the fascist warlords of the West Pakistan" and "allegiance to the Bangladesh government".

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
