One evacuee every second
2021-07-07T01:52:45+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/one-evacuee-every-second-2124266

July 4, 1971

CANADIAN MPS PREFER AUTONOMY TO RECOGNITION

A three-man Canadian parliamentary delegation was convinced that autonomy in Bangladesh was preferable to recognition, and a situation should be created where the elected representatives of the people would be allowed to fulfil their duties.

The delegation told newsmen today in Calcutta that they had no doubt that the 6.5 million evacuees were forced to flee their homes only because of a violent military action. Having returned from a trip in the morning to three refugee camps, they said they were deeply moved by the human tragedy.

BANGLADESH REFUGEE CRISIS

India was receiving one evacuee from Bangladesh every second according to an official report. Everyday some 100,000 people are driven out from Bangladesh to the India side of the border. The cost of food and shelter for each evacuee was estimated at four rupees a day.

NIXON CRITICISED BY SENATOR ON AID TO PAKISTAN

Senator Frank Church, Idaho Democrat and a member of the senate foreign relations committee, charged in a Senate speech today that $35 million worth of military equipment was still in the "pipeline" for delivery to Pakistan.

He said President Richard Nixon "refuses to stop the flow" despite recommendations from the "bureaucracy" for the cancelling of outstanding licenses for equipment destined for the Pakistani armed forces.

Senator Church did not elaborate on how he had made the estimate of $35 million in additional military equipment awaiting shipment to Pakistan. Qualified sources said, however, that this was the total value of outstanding licenses issued by the State Department's Office of Munition Controls before the programme of military sales was suspended on April 6.

These sources said the State and Defense Departments had prepared a memorandum listing the outstanding licenses and recommended to the White House that they be cancelled.

But, they said, Nixon ruled that the shipments be maintained.

WAR INEVITABLE, SAYS PAKISTAN LEADER

Nawabzada Nasrullah Khan, West Pakistan Chief of the Pakistan Democratic Party, said today in Lahore that war with India was inevitable and the country should prepare to fight. He claimed India was trying to bleed Pakistan white and said the situation was now more dangerous than in 1965 when India and Pakistan fought a three-week war.

MALAYSIA WILL NOT INTERFERE IN PAKISTAN'S AFFAIRS

Malaysia will not interfere in the conflict between East and West Pakistan as it was an internal matter, Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak said in parliament today. He hoped that the problem would be settled amicably and peacefully between the parties concerned. On the aid given by Malaysia for the relief of the refugees, the prime minister said this was channelled through the United Nations in response to UN appeal by the UN Secretary General U Thant.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
