World Bank report disclosed
2021-07-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/world-bank-report-disclosed-2126126

July 10, 1971

WORLD BANK REPORT ON HORROR IN PAKISTAN

World Bank board members today received copies of an outspoken report on the dire situation in East Pakistan. The report was prepared by the World Bank and earlier last week Robert McNamara, the World Bank's president, had decided to withdraw it and expunge it from the official record. However, McNamara had to reverse his decision on July 9 after it had leaked to newspapers that the report had been suppressed.

The report was prepared by Peter Cargill, the World Bank's director for South East Asia.

The World Bank report claimed that the reign of terror by government troops continued in East Pakistan, the economy was paralysed and urban life was badly shattered. It said guerrillas were still fighting against Pakistan President Yahya Khan's regime. It apprehended that widespread famine could develop in the autumn.

The Yahya regime was living in isolation and as a consequence was ignorant of world opinion and even the situation in East Pakistan, added the report.

AWAMI LEAGUE MUST PLAY ITS ROLE: BHUTTO

Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, chairman of the Pakistan Peoples Party, called for a reconciliation within the Pakistan framework. Bhutto, who had been on an unofficial visit to Iran, said in an interview with a Tehran newspaper that there must be a political settlement and the Awami League must play its part. The sooner it came about the better, he added.

Bhutto further said that on his return to Pakistan he would call on President Yahya Khan and demand a speedy return to civilian rule.

BANGLADESH'S PLEA TO VISTING FOREIGNERS

Foreigners visiting liberated areas in Bangladesh were advised by the Provisional Government to have their travel documents authenticated by them in the appropriate manner. Similarly, foreigners had been advised to have their documents endorsed by the authority at Bangladesh Missions abroad.

GUERILLA WAR CONTINUES

Guerilla operations in Dhaka and Narayanganj were continuing unabated. The power supply to Dhaka was seriously disrupted when the guerillas uprooted three electric pylons in the Tangi. An industrialist and a well-known collaborator Amir Hussain had been killed. The guerillas threw grenades at Gulshan Cinema Hall at Narayanganj causing the death of three non-Bangalees. They also threw grenades at the court compound of Narayanganj in which five persons were killed.

Besides Dhaka and Narayanganj, there had been a spate of bomb explosions in all the major towns and so far 10 "peace committee" members had been killed in the province. In Khulna, the chairman of the "peace committee" got a threatening note from the Naxalites and was later killed. It was also reported that three members of the peace committee in Sylhet were killed by the freedom fighters.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
