Sector Commanders’ Conference begins
2021-07-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/sector-commanders-conference-begins-2126901

July 11, 1971

SECTOR COMMANDERS' CONFERENCE

The first conference (July 11-17) of Sector Commanders began at the office on Theatre Road-8 in Kolkata today. Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed presided over the conference. Different problems of freedom fighters and the future plan of the war were discussed there. All of Bangladesh was divided into eleven sectors and different sub-sectors for operational purposes during this conference. Lt Col MA Rab and Group Captain AK Khandaker were appointed as Chief of Staff and Deputy Chief of Staff respectively.

KISSINGER CALLS ON YAHYA

Henry Kissinger, American President Nixon's adviser on security affairs, today discussed various issues concerning India and Pakistan with President Yahya Khan with whom he met for the second time during his three-day visit to Pakistan, reported Radio Pakistan. The Radio however didn't disclose the details of the talks.

An official spokesman told newsmen that the two also discussed bilateral relations between Pakistan and the US. The spokesman denied reports that Kissinger had met Awami League leader Kamal Hossain in Nahiagali yesterday.

Kissinger later left for Tehran.

INDIANS WILL MOVE BANGLADESHI REFUGEES

India decided to move about 2.5 million Bangladeshi refugees to central camps to relieve the tremendous pressure on her border states. RK Khadilkar, the minister of labor, employment and rehabilitation, told reporters that 46 camps, each having 50,000 refugees, would house refugees in various areas including Madhya Pradesh, in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. Some camps had already been built, he said.

Khadilkar said that by July 11 about 6,763,000 East Pakistanis had crossed into India since the Pakistan Army began to crush the Bangladesh movement in March. Of the total, 3,163,000 were women and 1,135,000 were under 18, he added.

PAK DEADLINE FOR JOINING DUTY EXTENDED

The martial law authorities in East Pakistan extended the deadline for workers' joining work to July 20, 1971. The authorities earlier order had asked the workers to report for duty by June 30. But the order was mostly ignored by the workers. The present order was accompanied by an assurance that no penal measure would be taken against any worker for long absence and service continuity would be maintained.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
