‘It was like the morning after a nuclear attack’
2021-07-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/it-was-the-morning-after-nuclear-attack-2128596

July 13, 1971

EXCERPTS FROM WORLD BANK GROUP'S REPORT

The New York Times today published excerpts from a report by a mission of the World Bank that visited East Pakistan in June, 1971 and from a report on a survey of the western area of Bangladesh by Hendrik van der Heijden, an economist and member of the mission.

"The situation is very far indeed from normal; nor are there any signs that normality is being approached or that matters are even moving in that direction," said the mission report.

Hendrik van der Heijden reported, "Approaching Jessore, it became soon clear that this was the area where the army punitive action had been very severe: From the air, totally destroyed villages were clearly visible, a building was still on fire, and to the eastern side of the runway a good many houses had been destroyed.

"The authorities estimate that the population of Jessore itself is down from 80,000 to 15,000–20,000. Some 20,000 people were killed in Jessore. The city's center has been destroyed; commerce has come to a standstill. More than 50 percent of the shops have been destroyed," he added.

In Kushtia, according to the economist, "The population was down from 40,000 to 5,000. Ninety percent of the houses, shops, banks and other buildings were totally destroyed. People were sitting around dazed. When we moved around, everyone fled. It was like the morning after a nuclear attack. The people were terrified and still shocked and dazed. I asked them to show me a shop where food was being sold: It was in the next ninety minutes impossible to find one."

KENNEDY REVEALS PAKISTAN STUDY

Senator Edward M Kennedy made public today a survey on East Pakistan prepared by two American officials and declared that it showed that millions would starve unless emergency measures were taken before August 1.

He declared that this "additional information" together with the findings of a special mission of the World Bank made a "mockery of the Administration's policy toward Pakistan" and should "finally shatter the official optimism of our Government".

State Department officials, commenting on Senator Kennedy's charges, said they could find no evidence in the department's field reports that would bear out the prediction of widespread famine by August 1. They said the problem was largely one of internal distribution and added that United States funds had been made available for the charter of river steamers to improve food distribution.

The officials stressed that regular economic assistance to Pakistan had been held in abeyance pending completion of the report of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, or World Bank.

The World Bank report said East Pakistan had been so ravaged by the military action that new international development efforts "will have to remain in state of suspension for at least the next year or so".

STREET NAMES CHANGED

Street names in Dhaka were being changed to remove all Hindu names as well as those of Bangalee Muslim nationalists as part of a campaign to stamp out Bangalee culture. Shankhari Bazar Road in Dhaka was changed to Tikka Khan Road, after the lieutenant general who was the martial‐law governor of East Pakistan and who was known as "the Butcher".

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
