The New York Times condemns arms supply
2021-07-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/the-new-york-times-condemns-arms-supply-2129411

July 14, 1971

ARMS SUPPLY TO PAKISTAN CONDEMNED

The New York Times in an editorial published today urges the US administration to promptly divert military supplies already en route to Pakistan.

It wrote, "The report of a World Bank mission to East Pakistan last month is a devastating indictment of the West Pakistani military crackdown in Bengal. It strongly challenges the [US] Administration's policy of continuing both military and economic support for the Yahya Khan regime in Islamabad. This official confirmation of earlier widespread reports of barbaric action in East Pakistan renders inexcusable any further shipment of American military equipment to the Pakistani armed forces.

"There are clear grounds for suspending all further military and economic aid to the Pakistani Government, excepting relief supplies, until the reign of terror in East Pakistan is ended and steps are taken to restore power to elected representatives of the people who are currently in prison or in hiding," added the newspaper.

SOVIET ENVOY REGRETS US ARMS AID TO PAKISTAN

Mir Qasimov, vice-consul of the Soviet Union at Calcutta, deplored US arms aid to Pakistan and said it would only aggravate the situation in Bangladesh. He emphasises that the situation in Bangladesh should be tackled by arriving at a political settlement between the leader of the Awami League Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Pakistan President Yahya Khan. The diplomat further said the influx of evacuees from Bangladesh to India had created a "colossal human problem".

FIERCE RESISTANCE AT BELABO

Bangladeshi guerrillas put up a fierce resistance against the Pakistan army at Belabo, Narsingdi. Seven freedom fighters embraced martyrdom during the fight.

JAPAN STUDYING METHODS OF SETTLEMENT IN BANGLADESH

The Japanese government was anxious for a political settlement in East Pakistan and was examining how best that could be done, Ataushi Uyama, Japan's ambassador in India, said in Calcutta. He added that the large-scale influx of refugees from East Pakistan was no doubt a serious problem which had put great strain on India's economy.

REFUGEES SENT TO MIDNAPORE

Midnapore received the first batch of 1,500 refugees from Bangladesh. On their arrival in Midnapore station they were immediately sent to Brindabanpur camp by 20 reserved buses.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
