Military victory the only solution: Tajuddin
2021-07-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/military-victory-the-only-solution-tajuddin-2130271

July 15, 1971

ALL-OUT WAR TILL VICTORY

The Prime Minister of Bangladesh Tajuddin Ahmed declared today that "military victory is the only solution to the situation in Bangladesh", reported The People, a pro-AL English-language weekly.

It also reported that Awami League members of the National and Provincial Assemblies at a meeting had taken an "oath of all-out war till victory".

The report said 110 members of the National Assembly and 200 members of the Provincial Assembly had attended the meeting, which was held somewhere in Bangladesh.

The oath read: "The enemy shall be engaged not only on land, but also in the air and on the sea if need be, and shall be defeated once and for all to safeguard the independence of the people of Bangladesh."

The meeting decided to rename the Mukti Fauj (liberation army) as "Mukti Bahini" (liberation forces) signifying the "advent of the air force and the navy".

The Mukti Fauj now has over 1,20,000 men, comprising about 40,000 troops of the East Bengal Regiment, East Pakistan Rifles and about 80,000 volunteers. The Fauj was led by a large number of Bangalee officers of the Pakistan army who had defected and joined the freedom fighters.

FOOD SITUATION IN EAST PAKISTAN

Joseph Farland, US ambassador to Pakistan, called on Pakistan President Yahya Khan today in Rawalpindi. He expressed serious concerns about possibility of a famine developing in East Pakistan.

Referring to USAID's estimates of rice production and food gap, the US ambassador stated that unless heroic efforts were made, famine conditions would likely prevail. He also pointed out that if famine conditions developed, people would sustain further widespread suffering, the Pakistan government would face additional major public relations problem, and substantial new exodus of refugees might occur.

Farland emphasised that the Pakistan government had been reluctant to admit possibility of famine and consequently problems of food and transport had not been dealt with sufficient urgency.

Yahya said he had carefully studied the Ryan report (a survey of the East Pakistan port and shipping situation prepared in June 1971 by Joseph A Ryan of the US Department of Agriculture at the request of Pakistan), and from it and his own government's sources of information he was considerably concerned by the problem presented by the food situation.

He said as a result of Farland's suggestion to him that a "food czar" should be appointed, a suggestion reflected in the Ryan report, he had as of yesterday appointed the former head of the Chittagong Port Authority, retired commodore Bajwa, as his personal representative with superior powers to act for alleviation of the problem.

Yahya further said as a result of his concern for East Pakistan and the multitude of issues that it presented, he would be going over to Dhaka within the next two weeks.

HOUSE GROUP BIDS HALT TO US AID TO PAKISTAN

The US House Foreign Affairs Committee voted today in favour of proposals to withhold military and economic assistance from Pakistan.

The proposal regarding Pakistan would cut off United States funds until East Pakistani refugees return to their homes and "reasonable stability" is achieved in the country.

It was the first concrete move by the US Congress to try to utilise America's foreign aid leverage against the Pakistan government.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
