A country in the grip of fear
2021-07-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/country-the-grip-fear-2131186

July 16, 1971

BOTH SIDES OF THE DISASTER

Reg Prentice, a member of the British parliamentary delegation which had visited both Pakistan and India to study the present crisis, wrote an account of his tour today in the New Statesman:

"Everywhere we saw symptoms of a country in the grip of fear. The basis of this fear became apparent as each member of our party in turn received confidences from people who spoke to one of us quietly, snatching a few words in a corner and giving us a picture of the real situation. Between us we received a significant number of these confidential statements from a wide variety of people. They all added up to the same conclusion: not only had the army committed widespread killing and violence in the March/April period, but it still continued. Murder, torture, rape and the burning of homes were still going on. It was a story that would be powerfully reinforced by the accounts given us by the refugees in India a few days later.

"The worst example we saw was near the Comilla-Chittagong railway line, where two bridges had been blown up. Just south of the large one, the Feni bridge, between 30 and 50 villages had been completely destroyed, apparently a reprisal by the army.

"There was a great deal of propaganda about the country returning to normality but the facts belie this. Even in areas, where the army has been in firm control since the end of March, the economic and social life of the country is at a very low ebb.

"Four days later we saw the refugee situation on the Indian side. Any temptation to accept the smallest part of the Pakistan version would have been swept away by the awful reality of what is happening. As we drove up the road towards the frontier at Boyra, about 70 miles north-east of Calcutta, we drove past thousands of new refugees crowding the road on either side. They just kept coming, for mile after mile, people of all ages, carrying their cooking pots and little bundles of possessions. Young children were carrying babies a few weeks old. Some people were lying helplessly in the ditches. Some had died in the ditches. The numbers were so vast that our convoy had difficulty in making its way up the road. And so it goes on, sometimes as many as 100,000 new refugees a day reaching India.

"I came away feeling that the appalling events of the last few months might well be leading to an ever deepening tragedy for both countries. This can be averted by a political settlement acceptable to the people of East Bengal. Time is not on anybody's side."

PAKISTAN STILL HOPEFUL OF GETTING US AID

The possibility of Pakistan getting economic aid from the USA still exists, says Radio Pakistan. The Radio quoting officials of the US State Department said that notwithstanding the vote by the Foreign Relations Committee of the House of Representatives the possibility of Pakistan getting $118 million still exists.

PADMA CARRYING ARMS, ADMITS STATE DEPARTMENT

A State Department spokesman admitted that the 6,855-tonne Pakistani freighter Padma, which dockers in Baltimore had refused to load, was carrying a shipment of arms for Pakistan.

Thomas Gleason, president of the International Longshoremen's Association, instructed dockers not to work on the Karachi-bound freighter because the union wanted to stay neutral in the East Pakistan situation.

The State Department spokesman said an export license for the arms on the Padma was issued before such shipments were banned on March 25.

He said the shipment included spare parts for aircraft, military vehicles, ships and artillery. It also included 2,200 rounds of .22 calibre ammunition, he added.

$28MN REQUIRED FOR RELIEF IN EAST PAKISTAN

UN officials reported to Secretary General U Thant that $28 million would be required to meet East Pakistan's initial needs for relief. It was reported that the Pakistan government had submitted to U Thant's representative in Bangladesh a list of relief needs. The list included 250,000 tonnes of food grains, 100,000 tonnes of edible oil, cash grants totalling $40 million for the people returning to East Pakistan and other affected citizens and several vessels for water and land transport.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
