Mission staff reaffirm loyalty to Bangladesh
2021-07-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/mission-staff-reaffirm-loyalty-bangladesh-2132516

July 18, 1971

MISSION STAFF INTERVIEWED BY SWISS REPRESENTATIVE

All the members of the Bangladesh mission interviewed by the Swiss representative Dr Bonard in Calcutta today refused to be repatriated to Pakistan and reaffirmed their allegiance to the Bangladesh government.

The Swiss representative conducted the interviews in an effort to resolve the deadlock over the question of repatriation of Indian and Pakistani diplomats from Kolkata and Dhaka respectively.

Dr Bonard interviewed 64 members of the former Pakistan deputy high commission who had switched over their loyalty to Bangladesh in the presence of the Indian representative Ashoke Roy and the Pakistani deputy high commissioner Mehdi Masud.

Hossain Ali, chief of the Bangladesh mission in Kolkata, refused to appear before the Swiss representative for the interview. Later clarifying the point Hossain Ali told newsmen, "Since the Swiss representative as also the Pakistani deputy high commissioner held lower diplomatic status than myself, I could not possibly go to them to appear for the interview."

YAHYA'S SUMMIT OFFER A TRAP: SWARAN SINGH

The Indian external affairs minister Swaran Singh today described president Yahya Khan's reported offer to meet Indira Gandhi as a trap. The military ruler should instead talk with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to solve the Bangladesh issue, he said. Swaran Singh strongly criticised the USA for supply arms and ammunition to Pakistan and appreciated those countries who had refused to do so.

PAKISTAN BANS BOAT BUILDING

Pakistan Army authorities banned building of country boats in the riverine areas of Bangladesh, reported Hindusthan Standard referring to a high school teacher who arrived in Kolkata from Bhola. He said the announcement made in early July prescribed three years rigorous imprisonment and confiscation of property for violation of the ban. Army authorities were also issuing a green and yellow identification disk to non-Awami League people.

TUNKU MEETS YAHYA

Tunku Abdul Rahman, secretary-general of the 23-member-nation Islamic Secretariat, today discussed with president Yahya Khan the situation in East Pakistan. Tunku arrived in Pakistan yesterday on an eight-day visit to assess the needs of Pakistan and enable his organisation to help ease sufferings in East Pakistan. Tunku on his arrival from London told newsmen that he was seeking ways to organise a joint relief effort by members of the secretariat in East Pakistan.

GERMAN STUDENTS URGE THANT TO MOVE UN BODIES

Various student organisations of Freiburg University in Germany in an open letter urged the UN Secretary General U Thant " to do his utmost in the organisations of the United Nations to prevail upon the West Pakistan government to respect human rights". They demanded that the suppression of human rights and genocide in Bangladesh should be stopped and "it should be made possible for the refugees to return to their country in which instead of systematic killings there should be freedom and right of self-determination".

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
