Afghan VP slams Pakistani trolls with image of Pakistan army’s 1971 surrender
2021-07-22T18:49:33+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/asia/south-asia/news/afghan-vp-slams-pakistani-trolls-image-pakistani-armys-1971-surrender-2135166

Afghanistan's Vice-president Amrullah Saleh has hit out at Pakistani trolls by tweeting the iconic picture of the signing of the instrument of surrender by Pakistan's army in the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War.

"We don't have, and never will have, such a picture in our history... Dear Pak Twitter attackers, the [Taliban] and terrorism will not be able to cure the trauma of this image. Find other ways," he tweeted.

On December 16, 1971, Pakistani Commander Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi surrendered to Lt Gen Jagjit Singh Aurora, the commander of the Joint Forces, at the then Ramna Race Course (now Suhrawardy Uddyan), where Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman made his historic call for independence on March 7, 1971.

As a symbol of surrender, Niazi also handed over his revolver to Lt Gen Aurora.

We don't have such a picture in our history and won't ever have. Yes, yesterday I flinched for a friction of a second as a rocket flew above & landed few meters away. Dear Pak twitter attackers, Talibn & terrorism won't heal the trauma of this picture. Find other ways. pic.twitter.com/lwm6UyVpoh — Amrullah Saleh (@AmrullahSaleh2) July 21, 2021

We don't have such a picture in our history and won't ever have. Yes, yesterday I flinched for a friction of a second as a rocket flew above & landed few meters away. Dear Pak twitter attackers, Talibn & terrorism won't heal the trauma of this picture. Find other ways. pic.twitter.com/lwm6UyVpoh

"Yes, yesterday I flinched for a fraction of a second as a rocket flew above and landed few meters away," Saleh said in the tweet.

He was referring to the rocket attacks that took place on Tuesday while President Ashraf Ghani and others were offering prayers on the occasion of Eid-ul-Adha at the Presidential Palace in Kabul.

At least three rockets hit near the presidential palace on Tuesday shortly before Ashraf Ghani was to give an address, reports AP.

There were no injuries and the rockets landed outside the heavily fortified palace grounds, said Mirwais Stanikzai, spokesman for the interior minister.

The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for the attack on its Amaq news channel.

Police quickly fanned out across the area. One car parked on a nearby street was completely destroyed; the police said it was used as launching pad for the rockets.

On July 15, the Afghan First Vice-president Amrullah Saleh said the Pakistani air force has warned the Afghan National Army (ANA) and Afghan Air Force that any attempt to evict the Taliban from the neighbouring Spin Boldak area would be met with and repelled by the Pakistan Air Force, reports WION.
