1971: More districts freed as Pak troops retreat, surrender
2011-12-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Star National Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-213581

The memorial dedicated to the Liberation War martyrs at Kamalpur in Jamalpur district,

right,

martyrs' memorial on the premises of Shilpakala Academy in Narail town. Photo: STAR

Amid rapid advancements by valiant freedom fighters and Indian allied forces, Pakistan army retreated from Mymensingh and surrendered at Narail on December 10 in 1971 while Tangail and Jamalpur districts became free from the occupation forces on December 11.

Freedom fighters and the district administration took various programmes marking Mymensingh liberation day yesterday, reports our Mymensingh correspondent.

Principal Motiur Rahman MP, also a veteran freedom fighter, inaugurated a procession of freedom fighters in the town as chief guest.

He also inaugurated a week long programmes marking Mymensingh liberation day and Victory Day.

At a discussion on the occasion, district unit commander of Muktijoddha Sangsad Nazim Uddin Ahmed, Mayor of Mymensingh municipality Ekramul Haque Titu, Mymensingh Superintendent of Police Khandaker Golam Faruq, Additional Deputy Commissioner Kazi Ashraf Uddin and Sadar upazila parishad Chairman Fayzur Rahman Fakir spoke, among others.

The speakers demanded early trial of war criminals to free the nation from stigma pasted on the forehead of the nation.

On December 7 in 1971, the freedom fighters freed Haluaghat from the occupation army and on December 8, Phulpur and Bhaluka upazilas were freed followed by the liberation of Gouripur, Trishal, Iswarganj and Tarakanda areas.

On December 10, the freedom fighters led by Principal Motiur Rahman, president of Awami League district unit, and Indian allied force marched towards Mymensingh town and freed it, forcing the Pakistan army to flee.

Out Narail Correspondent adds: Like every year, the people of Narail celebrated December 10 as 'Narail liberation day' with great enthusiasm.

On December 9 in 1971, the freedom fighters attacked the Pakistan army at Water Development Board camp and the enemy surrendered with huge arms and ammunition the next morning.

In remembrance of the Liberation War, Narail Chitra Theatre with the help of freedom fighters yesterday displayed the scenes of fighting with the occupation forces at different places.

Freedom fighters and different socio-cultural organisations observed daylong programmes including hoisting of the national flag with gunfire, placing wreaths on the portrait of Bangabandhu and at Shaheed Minar, rally, special prayers, art competition, lathi khela, cultural function and jarigan.

Our Tangail Correspondent reports: On December 11 in 1971, freedom fighters entered Tangail town and took control of the region.

The day before, paratroopers from the Indian allied forces landed at Pungli near Tangail town while the Pakistani occupation forces retreated to Dhaka.

During the war, the brave freedom fighters, especially those belonging to Kaderia Bahini, took part in many face-to-face fights with the Pakistani forces at different places in the district.

On the occasion of 'Tangail liberation day', different political and cultural organisations arranged various programmes across the district.

The programmes include hoisting national flags atop buildings, placing wreaths at martyrs' memorials, colourful rallies, discussions and cultural functions.

A Correspondent reports from Jamalpur: Freedom fighter Faizur Rahman, company commander of Sector-11, formally declared Jamalpur a free area by hoisting the national flag atop local WAPDA rest house on this day in 1971.

In November, Col Abu Taher, commander of Sector-11, launched an attack on Kamalpur, a stronghold of the Pakistan army, and engaged them in a fierce fighting.

As he was seriously wounded, Wing Commander Hamidullah Khan Birprotik later took the charge as sector commander.

Amid fierce attack by the freedom fighters, Pakistan soldiers left their Kamalpur base on December 4 and retreated to their regional headquarters at Jamalpur.

Freedom fighters marched to the town and compelled the occupation forces to decamp on the night of December 10.
