Massive offensive against Pak Army
2021-07-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/massive-offensive-against-pak-army-2136246

July 25, 1971

TIKKA KHAN ADMITS BLOWING UP BRIDGE

East Pakistan Governor Lt Gen Tikka Khan today admitted that a railway bridge in Cumilla had been blown up by the Mukti Fouj recently. He visited the site of the bridge and claimed that the bridge connecting Laxam and Feni was in the final stage of reconstruction, said Radio Pakistan. He was accompanied by the Jordanian Ambassador to Pakistan Syed Kamal el Sharik, now on a visit to East Pakistan.

Powerful hidden mines laid by the Mukti Bahini guerillas blasted off a passenger train, near Gochihata station, between Bhairab Bazar and Kishoreganj in Bangladesh recently killing at least 30 persons including 10 Pakistani troops and the driver.

In a massive offensive on the Pakistani Army position at Shahbajpur railway station in Sylhet Sector, the Mukti Bahini guerillas killed at least 40 of the enemy army.

TUNKU TO HELP RETURN OF REFUGEES

Former prime minister of Malaysia Tunku Abdul Rahman, now secretary general of the Islamic Secretariat, said today that the Islamic Summit countries would move in to do their best to help refugees from Bangladesh now sheltered in India. Tunku returned to Kuala Lumpur yesterday after his visit to East Pakistan where he led a delegation of representatives of the Muslim nations including Jordan, Afghanistan, Iran and Kuwait. Tunku added that Pakistan government assured his delegation that they would welcome all refugees back and "I am going to convey this assurance to India when I visit there later."

NISHIMURA CRITICISES YAHYA

Nishimura, Japanese Socialist Party parliamentarian, said in Kolkata today that it was wrong on the part or Gen Yahya Khan to order army crackdown instead of handing over power to the Awami League.

Nishimura, who visited several camps sheltering the evacuees from Bangladesh at Bongaon in 24-Parganas district said in an interview that violence could not solve any problem.

Nishimura said that the UN should intervene to start fresh negotiations between the West Pakistan authorities and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman for a political settlement in the trouble-torn Bangladesh.

Giving a horrifying picture of miserable situation of the people in Bangladesh, Nishimura said that during his tour of the camps in the border areas, he had found thousands of men, women and children trekking long distances to cross over to India for safety. When such a condition was prevailing in Bangladesh, people of the world should try to assess the real situation, he commented.

AID BID FOR BANGLADESH

Headed by a young white South African, a group of 10 people would assemble in Kolkata within the next few days and then try to drive two SUVs loaded with food and medical supplies across the closed frontier into East Pakistan. The leader, Colin Jackson, was a 29-year-old writer whose family lives in Johannesburg. Operating under the title Omega, the group would include an American woman married to a Bangladesh activist, a British nurse in her fifties, a Peace News journalist, an ex-policeman and an official of British European Airways, who is devoting his leave to the enterprise.

Jackson said yesterday that he believed aid, desperately needed inside East Pakistan, was being prevented from getting there by "the principle of national sovereignty", backed up in this case by the Pakistan Army.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
