Dhaka residents asked to evacuate
2021-07-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/dhaka-residents-asked-evacuate-2136941

July 26, 1971

GUERILLAS ASK PEOPLE TO FLEE DHAKA

Handbills prepared by Bangalee guerrillas were distributed in Dhaka asking the population to begin evacuation of the city in preparation for a campaign against the Pakistan Army, reported The New York Times.

The handbills appeared in the Moghbazar neighbourhood of the city. The warning, signed by the Mukti Bahini, advised residents to move out by 6:00pm.

The public was also warned that traffic, including taxis and rickshaws, should be off the streets at night from July 28 onwards, and that the entire city should be evacuated after August 1.

Bombs had been exploded in Dhaka every night for the last two weeks, and gunfire often accompanied the explosions. Detonations heard last night could not be immediately explained.  Actions included the mining of roads in the outskirts of Dhaka and bombing attacks on power stations, the city gas supply, homes of people regarded by the guerrillas as enemies, army installations, bridges and communications, added the American newspaper.

The New York Times further reported that reaction of the Pakistan Army was generally rapid and forceful and there had been many arrests of suspects. Army patrols moved constantly through Dhaka and its environs and military guards are stationed at most important buildings. Despite this, guerrillas caused considerable dislocation of essential services since their campaign began two weeks ago and killed a number of persons. There was a steady flow of casualties, according to witnesses, although no estimates of numbers were available.

BANGLADESH STAMPS

The first series of eight Bangladesh postage stamps would be issued on July 29. These stamps were to replace the Pakistan postage stamps hitherto overprinted 'Bangladesh'. The Bangladesh government authorised the international distribution of these stamps. The first series would be issued for internal mail as well as for external postage. The eight separate designs for this series depicted the struggle for independence of Bangladesh. The designs are the work of Biman Mullick. The stamps were printed by lithographic process on white-coated security paper.

RECOGNITION WHEN IT WILL BE IN OUR BEST INTEREST: INDIRA

At a closed-door meeting today Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi told leaders of opposition parties in parliament that the Bangladesh government would be given recognitions as soon as the government of India was convinced that this would be in the best interests of India and the cause of Bangladesh. Most opposition leaders urged the prime minister that recognition be accorded without further delay. Some of them said that recognition would strengthen the freedom struggle.

SN Mishra, a Congress leader, suggested adoption of a resolution expressing concern at the failure of the United Nations to prevent genocide in Bangladesh. The suggestion was rejected by the government and the leaders of other parties.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
