Local Swechhasebak League leader calls Natore-2 MP’s father a 'razakar'
2021-07-25T17:29:16+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/local-swechhasebak-league-leader-calls-natore-2-mps-father-razakar-2136621

President of the newly formed district committee of Natore Swechhasebak League, Ishtiaq Ahmed Dollar, today claimed that father of Natore-2 lawmaker Shafiqul Islam Shimul was a razakar.

Ishtiaq made the remark at a press conference organised by the district unit of Swechhasebak League at a community centre in Natore this morning.

Ishtiaq was speaking in response to his father being called a razakar at an event held yesterday.

"If my father were a razakar, his name would be in the DC office list. MP Shimul's father Hasan Ali Sardar's name is on page number 600 and list number 21 of 'History-Tradition and Liberation War of Natore District' by Sujit Sarkar," Ishtiaq said.

Ishtiaq added, "I will take legal action against the baseless information presented against me and my father. I will also file a case with Natore Sadar Police Station today."

Shafiul Azam Shopon, general secretary of the newly formed committee of the Swechhasebak League, said in a written statement read at the event that the press conference held yesterday against the committee was "conspiratorial".

Shopon said, "I have been called a drug lord and it is false and fabricated. MP Shafiqul Islam Shimul runs the drug business in Natore."

Meanwhile, Natore-2 MP Shafiqul Islam Shimul told The Daily Star that the information about his father being a razakar is false. The MP also stated that he would file a complaint against the author of the book that contained his father's name.

The MP said that former MP Ahad Ali Sarkar and Natore Sadar Upazila Chairman Shariful Islam Ramzan had paid the author to include his father's name in the book.

Denying allegations of collusion with the author, Ahad ali Sarkar said, "The allegations against me are baseless and motivated, the book's author is a well-known Rajshahi University professor who conducted extensive research before writing it."

Meanwhile, Shariful Islam Ramzan said, "I don't know the author, and there is no question of collusion with him."
