U Thant concerned over Bangladesh situation
2021-07-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/u-thant-concerned-over-bangladesh-situation-2137701

July 27, 1971

CONVERSATION BETWEEN NIXON AND KISSINGER

In a telephone conversion with American president Nixon, his security adviser Kissinger stated, "I will make it clear with the Indians that there isn't going to be a war. …The problem—no military aid to Pakistan, they are not even getting economic aid. If anything will tempt the Indians to attack, it will be the complete helplessness of Pakistan."

In reply, Nixon said, "After all they have done, we just aren't going to let that happen."

THANT MAY CALL SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING

The UN secretary general U Thant had separate meetings with the Indian and Pakistani ambassadors today to discuss the continuing tension along the border of the two countries. The meeting followed the transmission by U Thant a confidential letter to the Security Council president recently expressing his deep concern about the developments in Bangladesh.

It was indicated by credible sources that Thant was thinking in terms of convening an informal meeting of the Security Council at an early date to discuss the Bangladesh situation.

Meanwhile, Pakistani authorities charged today that an Indian artillery barrage killed five civilians and wounded 13 in the district of Cumilla in East Pakistan.

Cumilla, which is close to the Indian frontier, was reported shelled last week and Pakistani officials said one civilian was killed. Shelling across the frontier occurred almost daily and had resulted in many disputes between the Indian and Pakistani governments.

Military authorities in Dhaka discounted the effectiveness of the two week old offensive being conducted by Bangalee guerillas. Handbills posted in Dhaka had warned the population to evacuate the city by Aug 1 to avoid injury in the upcoming clashes between guerrillas and the Pakistan army.

CONCERT FOR BANGLADESH

George Harrison, the former Beatle, held a news conference today with Ravi Shankar, the Indian sitar player, to discuss their sold out concerts at Madison Square Garden on August 1. He predicted at least $250,000 raised by the concerts would go to relief of homeless children in East Pakistan, through the United Nations Children's Fund.

NO PARALLEL IN HUMAN HISTORY

The East Pakistan refugee problem has no parallel in human history, Col MD Erla of the League of Red Cross Societies said in Kolkata today. Col Erla, a Norwegian, was there to help the Indian Red Cross aid the seven million refugees who had crossed from East Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
