Freedom fighters’ strength growing, admits Yahya
2021-08-02T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/freedom-fighters-strength-growing-admits-yahya-2142521

August 2, 1971

YAHYA'S MESSAGE TO DHAKA CONFERENCE

Pakistan President Yahya Khan today admitted the growing strength of the freedom fighters of Bangladesh and said "their challenge should be met".

"We have to meet the challenge of anti-national elements who seek to jeopardise our economy in an attempt to undermine the unity and integrity of the country," he said in a message to a four-day conference of chief executives of banks and financial institutions opened in Dhaka today.

Meanwhile, Yahya Khan in an interview with Tehran daily Kayhan International last week said Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman "would be court-martialled and I cannot say whether or not he would be alive when the [National] assembly meets."

OUTSIDE AID FOR REFUGEES CAN'T BUY US: INDIRA

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said today that no amount of foreign aid for refugees could influence India's policy towards Bangladesh. "Our Bangladesh policy is based on idealism and practical politics," she added.

As regards recognition of Bangladesh she said recognition at this moment could precipitate matters to such an extent that it might be harmful.

Meanwhile, in a communication to the UN Secretary-General, India today asked the international community to help restore normalcy inside Bangladesh through a political settlement and take "credible measures" for the safe return of seven million refugees from India.

India also rejected outright the secretary general's suggestion of posting representatives of the UN High Commission for Refugees in India. The communication, delivered in New York today by Samar Sen, Permanent Representative at the UN, was in reply to the aide memoire addressed by U Thant to India and Pakistan on July 20, 1971.

External Affairs Minister Swaran Singh made it clear in parliament today that "if the success of Mukti Fouj in establishing their control in any part of Bangladesh is taken as an excuse by President Yahya Khan to start war I have no doubt that our defence forces will give a befitting reply".

BADSHAH KHAN WARNS PAKISTANI LEADERS

The Pakhtoon leader Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, also known as Badshah Khan, today warned the Pakistani military rulers that they would not be able to solve the crisis arising from Bangladesh movement by "brute force" and called for a political solution of the issue. He deplored that those "who were drunk with power did not learn from history" and were following a path leading to the ruin of Pakistan.

DHAKA UNIVERSITY REOPENED

The University of Dhaka and the colleges of Dhaka city and Narayanganj including Dhaka Medical College and Salimullah Medical College reopened today. The attendance of the students was reported to be very thin.

PAKISTAN HC OFFICIAL SWITCHES TO BANGLADESH

Abdul Majid, a member of the Pakistan High Commission Staff in New Delhi, today declared his allegiance to the People's Republic of Bangladesh and sought political asylum in India.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
