Received death threats for mentioning Natore-2 MP's father as razakar in book: RU professor
2021-08-01T18:59:04+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/crime-justice/news/received-death-threats-mentioning-natore-2-mps-father-razakar-book-ru-professor-2142286

A teacher of Rajshahi University (RU) has allegedly received death threats for mentioning Natore-2 lawmaker Shafiqul Islam Shimul's father as a razakar in his book on Liberation war.

Sarker Sujit Kumar, a professor of RU's Bangla Department, filed a general diary with Boalia Model Police Station in Rajshahi city on July 29 seeking security, said Nadim, sub-inspector of the police station.

The GD was filed after the professor received death threats from Shimul's followers over the phone and other means.

Prof Sujit Kumar published the book, titled "History, Heritage and Liberation War of Natore District" in 2009. More editions of the book were published in 2010 and 2021 respectively.

Hasan Ali Sardar, father of Natore-2 MP Shimul, has been named in the list of razakars in the book.

In the GD, Prof Sujit Kumar mentioned that anti-Liberation War activities of Hasan Ali Sardar came up in discussions following a recent conflict over Natore Swechhasebak League's newly formed district committee.

"Local leaders stated my book as a reference for his father's anti-Liberation War activities. This is why MP Shimul is furious. Many unidentified people in favour of the MP have been threatening to kill me," Sujit Kumar mentioned the GD.

Talking to our RU correspondent, Professor Sujit Kumar said he compiled a list of freedom fighters, martyrs, and anti-Liberation War individuals by conducting interviews with concerned persons in the Natore area for three years at the field level.

"I do not know the MP or his father personally. I have been receiving various threats for the last 7-8 days. In this situation, I have sought security from the law enforcement agencies," he said.

Our correspondent could not reach MP Shafiqul Islam Shimul for his comment regarding the threats.

Earlier on July 25, Natore-2 MP Shafiqul Islam Shimul told The Daily Star that the information about his father being a razakar is false. The MP also stated that he would file a complaint against the author of the book.

The MP said that a former MP and Natore Sadar upazila chairman had paid the author to include his father's name in the book.
