Bangladesh warns against deployment of UN observers
2021-08-03T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-warns-against-deployment-un-observers-2143346

August 3, 1971

MUKTI BAHINI TO TREAT UN OBSERVERS AS COLLABORATORS

Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra today declared that the government and the people of Bangladesh would treat UN observers as collaborators of the Pakistani junta.

"Thus, with this blatant UN intervention in Bangladesh against the wishes of the people probably begins the first phase of the Congoisation, i.e. internationalisation of the Bangladesh issue. Whether the world's popular opinion likes it or not the way has now been paved toward a sub-continental bloodbath that may finally lead to a global tension of the magnitude of Cuba-US crisis of 1962. Only that this time it may not end the same way," added the clandestine radio station operated by the exiled Bangladesh government.

The Radio also warned of commando action against the UN observers as they would be treated as collaborators of the Pakistan army.

NIXON, KISSINGER DISCUSS ASSISTANCE TO PAKISTAN

American President Richard Nixon and his Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger discussed a memorandum in a telephone conversation today. The subject of the memorandum was military and economic assistance to Pakistan as a framework for South Asian decisions.

"The Pakistanis," Kissinger wrote in the memorandum, "have played along with the administrative game and have not made an issue of our restrictions. It was clear when I was in Islamabad that they were grateful that the US had not taken the formal step of imposing an embargo. The loss of military supplies bothers the military, but to [Pakistan President] Yahya [Khan] it seems at least as important that the US has not joined others in condemning him."

Kissinger said, during the telephone conversation, that Indians and critics of Pakistan in the Congress were asking for an embargo on arms and economic assistance to Pakistan.

"The extreme people want to cut off everything," he said, and concluded, "on relief we have a fighting chance but arms itself is hopeless."

In considering how to work around pressure for an embargo on arms shipments to Pakistan, Nixon asked about future export licences. Kissinger indicated that no licenses were being authorised "at this time".

Nixon concluded: "We will evaluate as it goes along. We will have to take the heat on this."

Meanwhile, the US House of Representatives approved today, by a close vote, a foreign aid bill that would authorise $6.9 billion in economic and military assistance over the next two years, but would suspend aid to Pakistan and Greece.

OPERATION NAKSHI BORDER OUTPOST

The Pakistan army formed a strong position at Nakshi Border outpost situated in Sherpur District. The Bangladesh Liberation Army made it a target considering its geographical importance. On August 3, the Bravo and Delta Company of the 8th East Bengal Regiment attacked the border outpost.

The Pakistanis fled the camp and took shelter in a nearby forest. But soon they attacked the freedom fighters. A fierce battle broke out. Pakistani army suffered heavy casualties. Twelve liberation fighters embraced martyrdom.

SADAT WRITES TO YAHYA ON BANGLADESH ISSUE

Egyptian President Sadat wrote to Yahya on the situation in East Pakistan. Sadat was believed to have stressed the need for creating conditions in East Pakistan which would enable refugees to return to their homes.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
