500 Indian MPs urge Thant to save Bangabandhu’s life
2021-08-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/500-indian-mps-urge-thant-save-bangabandhus-life-2145791

August 6, 1971

MEMORANDUM TO THANT

About 500 Indian MPs from all parties, except the Muslim League, addressed a memorandum to UN Secretary General U Thant urging him to save the life of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The document warned that "if any attempt is made to try the great leader [Bangabandhu] by the military government of Pakistan, waves of terrible reaction will sweep Bangladesh and the Government of Pakistan will be held responsible for the consequences."

The copies of the memorandum would also be sent to heads of all governments and various diplomatic missions in New Delhi, said a spokesman.

NIXON'S POLICY SENSELESS: KENNEDY

US Senator Edward Kennedy charged the Nixon administration with following a senseless policy towards the East Pakistan refugee problem. Kennedy, who was also the chairman of the senate judiciary subcommittee on refugees, said it made no sense to provide the West Pakistan government with military supplies which helped create refugees, while spending millions of dollars to aid those refugees. Senator Kennedy made the criticism in response to President Richard Nixon's statement on August 5 opposing a House of Representatives measure that recommended cutting off economic and military aid to the Pakistan government until the situation returned to normal in East Pakistan.

NEW YORK TIMES JUSTIFIES BANGALEE ENVOYS' DECISION

In an editorial published today, The New York Times said the resignation of 14 diplomats of Bangalee origin from the Pakistani embassy in Washington and the United Nations mission refuted the charge of Pakistan President Yahya Khan that the Bangalee uprising was merely the work of "mischief mongers, saboteurs and, infiltrators".

"It also casts doubt on his claim that the resistance has been 'crushed'," added the American daily.

It further commented, "Islamabad's current policies cannot bring stability to East Bengal. In trying to impose law and order by force of arms -- mostly American arms -- instead of through political accommodation, the military regime is merely fueling the fires of Bengali rebellion."

The New York Times called for immediate suspension of aid to Pakistan, except for emergency relief to the starving, for establishment of genuine stability in the subcontinent.

A UN TEAM IN GENEVA TO DIRECT PAKISTANI AID

UN Secretary General Thant reported today that the UN relief effort in Pakistan would be coordinated by a United Nations working group based in Geneva. Thirty-eight people from various countries would be recruited to serve as staff members at the initial stage. All the expenses would be borne by voluntary contributions made in response to the secretary general's appeals.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
