Pakistan govt accuses AL of massacre
2021-08-05T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/pakistan-govt-accuses-al-massacre-2145031

August 5, 1971

PAKISTAN PUBLISHES WHITE PAPER

The Pakistan government today published a white paper containing explanation and description of the actions taken by the military government since the night of 25 March 1971.

A summary of the white paper said it "unfolds, for the first time, the story of mass massacres and brutalities; which assumed the character of a political genocide, by the Awami League cadres and the rebels of the East Bengal Regiment and East Pakistan Rifles against fellow Pakistanis in areas which came temporarily under their control."

The Pakistan government stated that the crisis "arose from the failure of the elected representatives of the people to reach a consensus on the essentials of a federal constitution, due to the attitude of the Awami League leadership which sought to escalate a mandate of autonomy into a move for secession,"

Awami League's hardcore leadership sought to carry out its designs through constitutional contrivances, organised terror and Indian collusion, claimed the Pakistan government.

The white paper asserted that 100,000 men, women and children had died since March 1 in a "reign of terror unleashed by the Awami League".

It also accused Awami League of causing "incalculable damage to public and private buildings, transport and communications and industrial establishments".

"Unmentionable brutalities were committed with the active assistance of Indian armed infiltrators," declared the paper.

The paper further said: "But the Pakistan Army took the initiative on the night of March 25‐26 few hours before the Awami League was to strike, and foiled the secessionist bid to break up the country."

It was "to preserve the integrity of Pakistan that the President ordered the armed forces into action, who struck pre‐emptive blows barely a few hours before the Awami League's planned armed uprising and launching of the 'Independent Republic of Bangla Desh'," the paper added.

ANOTHER BANGALI DIPLOMAT QUITS POST

A second official of the Pakistan high commission in London quitted his senior position "in protest over the situation in East Pakistan". He is MD Akbar Luful Matin, 35, the commission's director of audit and accounts.

CHINESE COASTERS ARRIVE AT CHITTAGONG

Three coasters brought by Pakistan from China arrived at Chittagong today to begin transporting foodgrains. The coasters, each with a capacity of 1,000 tonnes, would be used in coastal and delta water in an effort to alleviate the risk of famine in East Pakistan. The coasters would be manned by the Pakistan navy.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
