Yahya speaks of mediation
2021-08-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahya-speaks-mediation-2147266

August 8, 1971

YAHYA SEEKS BRITISH SUPPORT

Pakistan President Yahya Khan said that he would like British mediation between India and Pakistan. "But," Yahya continued, "I do not want it if she [Britian] remains much less than neutral."

In an interview with The Sunday Times, the general said, "The risk of war with India had grown. There are skirmishes daily. …continuous statements from the Indian leaders that they will do this or that against Pakistan have justified me in stating there is real danger if this is allowed to continue."

THANT'S HELP SOUGHT FOR MUJIB'S RELEASE

The Bangladesh Central Action Committee appealed to the UN Secretary General U Thant for his personal intervention in saving the life of the Bangladesh leader Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. In a cable to U Thant, the convener of the committee, SK Day, said any secret trial of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman or his execution by the West Pakistan rulers would be contrary to the rule of law and human rights charter and would start a fresh conflagration.

GROMYKO MEETS SWARAN SINGH

A crowd of about 4,000, mostly members of India's pro-Moscow Communist party, gave Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko a tumultuous welcome at New Delhi's Palam Airport today. Many carried Soviet flags and banners with slogans supporting the Bangalee independence movement in East Pakistan.

Within less than two hours after his arrival, Gromyko and Indian Foreign Minister Swaran Singh started official talks. Problems arising out of the Bangladesh movement and Pakistan's attitude cropped up during their 65-minute talk.

US DONATION FOR RELIEF WORK IN EAST PAKISTAN

The US Secretary of State William P Rogers met for four hours with Secretary General Thant to discuss ways the United States and the United Nations could cooperate in aiding the millions of East Pakistanis left destitute by cyclone and war.

Both sides in the talks stressed that they felt that humanitarian efforts must take priority over politics. Earlier, Thant had warned the member states that he saw a grave threat to peace in the tensions along the Pakistani‐Indian frontier.

Rogers presented Thant with a check for $1 million, which a United States spokesman described as "the first million". The spokesman said another million would follow and that both contributions were to be used to finance United Nations efforts to aid the destitute and hungry in East Pakistan.

KABARI SENTENCED BY PAK AUTHORITIES

Leading Bangladesh actress Kabari was tried in absentia and sentenced 14 years' rigorous imprisonment by the Pakistani Martial Law Authorities. They also confiscated all her properties in Bangladesh.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
