Thant sounds warning about Bangabandhu trial
2021-08-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/thant-sounds-warning-about-bangabandhu-trial-2148791

August 10, 1971

THANT'S WARNING

UN Secretary General U Thant warned today that the trial of Bangladeshi leader Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman would "inevitably have repercussions outside the borders of Pakistan".

He added that he had been receiving expressions of concern about Bangabandhu from many governments every day.

U Thant further said there was a general feeling that the hope of restoring peace and normality in the region was "remote unless some kind of accommodation is reached".

Meanwhile, 11 American senators urged today that the United States government convey to Pakistan their "profound hope" that compassion would be shown to Bangabandhu.

RADIO BANGLADESH WARNS OF REVENGE

The Swadhin Bangla Betar today warned against the farcical trial of Bangabandhu and said,  "From the side of the people of Bangladesh let us assure Yahya, Tikka, Akbar, Niazi, Umar ( if he is not already dead) and rest of the butchers that we shall retaliate and retaliate so mercilessly that even your descendants, if left alive, would shiver at the mere thought of it for generations. With the murder of Bangabandhu would begin a war that will not end with mere independence for Bangladesh. It will continue until our leader's murder is satisfactorily avenged."

THANT DECIDES TO DEPLOY UN OFFICIALS IN DHAKA

US Secretary of State William Rogers, in a memorandum issued following his meeting with U Thant, reported today that the latter had decided to station 38 UN officials in Dhaka by early September, 1971 to coordinate and expedite the movement of relief supplies.

Once the arrangements were made, the UN would send some 150 additional personnel to other parts of East Pakistan, including the reception centres established to handle returning refugees. U Thant, however, expressed concern over the threats being made by the guerilla leadership against the safety of UN personnel in the area. He emphasised the need for a political accommodation with the Awami League in East Pakistan as the only real solution, added Rogers.

U Thant also said to the US secretary of state that he was prepared under Article 99 of the UN Charter to bring the situation between India and Pakistan to the attention of the Security Council if he decided that it involved a serious threat to peace.

KENNEDY ARRIVES IN CALCUTTA

Senator Edward Kennedy and his two special consultants were accorded a warm reception today morning at Calcutta airport. He told waiting newsmen of his determination to ensure relief and succour to the Bangladeshi refugees.

Commenting on the Indo-Soviet Pact, Kennedy said, " I hope that the Soviet Union will not challenge the USA with a defence treaty but rather with who can do the most to alleviate the great misery of the 7,500,000 refugees."

AGREEMENT ON REPATRIATION

India and Pakistan agreed, after a three‐and‐a‐half month impasse, on the repatriation of personnel at their respective diplomatic missions in Dhaka and Calcutta. Indian officials disclosed today that more than 200 Indians at the Deputy High Commission, or consulate, in Dhaka would be flown back to New Delhi on August 12 aboard Swiss and Soviet planes. Thirty West Pakistanis of the Pakistani Deputy High Commission in Calcutta would be flown to Karachi on an Iranian plane.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
