Indira calls upon nations to save Bangabandhu
2021-08-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-calls-upon-nations-save-bangabandhu-2149546

August 11, 1971

APPEAL BY INDIRA GANDHI

India Prime Minister Indira Gandhi appealed to 23 heads of government around the world to use their influence to save Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. In messages sent yesterday and made public today, she said India feared the trial of Bangabandhu "will be used only as a cover to execute him".

US President Richard Nixon, UN Secretary General Thant, Soviet Premier Aleksei N Kosygin, Yugoslavia President Josip Broz Tito and Germany Chancellor Willy Brandt were among those to whom the appeal was sent.

In her letter to President Nixon, Indira said, "The Government and people of India as well as our Press and Parliament are greatly perturbed by the reported statement of [Pakistan] President Yahya Khan that he is going to start a secret military trial of [Bangabandhu Sheikh] Mujibur Rahman without affording him any foreign legal assistance. We apprehend that this so-called trial will be used only as a publicity to execute Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. This will aggravate the situation in East Bengal and will create a serious situation in India because of the strong feelings of our people and all political parties. Hence our grave anxiety. We appeal to you to exercise your influence with President Yahya Khan to take a realistic view in the larger interest of the peace and stability of this region."

INDIA, RUSSIA WANT POLITICAL SOLUTION

The Soviet Union and India today called for a political solution of the Bangladesh issue. In a joint statement issued after four days of discussion, both countries demanded that the following actions should be taken to resolve the crisis: 1) stoppage of military atrocities by Pakistani troops, 2) stopping of the exodus of people from East Bengal to India, and 3) creation of conditions for safe return of refugees from India.

KENNEDY VISITS REFUGEE CAMP

Senator Edward M Kennedy today visited Kolkata hospitals jammed with Bangladeshi refugees to see what could be done to treat children suffering from severe malnutrition. The Massachusetts Democrat had planned to end his refugee camp tour today and go to Pakistan for two days, but Pakistan yesterday abruptly cancelled permission for him to visit Dhaka and Rawalpindi.

RUSSIA HAS SIGNED A PACT OF AGGRESSION: BHUTTO

The Chairman of the Pakistan Peoples' Party ZA Bhutto bitterly criticised the Soviet Union for what he called the signing with India of a "pact of aggression." The pact could embolden New Delhi to launch an aggression against Pakistan and China, he added.

UN SEEKS FUNDS TO SHIP AID TO PAKISTAN

UN Secretary General Thant appealed today for more money to help send relief to East Pakistan. A statement issued by his office said also that the first United Nations aid personnel had reached East Pakistan, with the main object of seeing "that all supplies, reach their destination, the people of East Pakistan". The statement today indicated that the United Nations cash receipts were less than a tenth of the amount estimated as necessary for the first phase of relief work.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
