Memorial plaque of historical ‘Jahajmara battle’ remains in a sorry state
2021-08-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Tangail
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/memorial-plaque-historical-jahajmara-battle-remains-sorry-state-2151446

The Liberation War memorial reminiscing the glorious victory in the 'Jahajmara battle' at Sirajkandi in Bhuapur upazila under the district has remained uncared for seven years since its construction.

The Public Works Department (PWD) constructed the memorial beside the Jamuna River, four kilometres to the north of the Bangabandhu Bridge east end, and eight kilometres to the south-west of Bhuapur upazila headquarters, at a cost of Tk 1 crore 64 lakh in 2013. Later, they handed over it to the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs.

On August 10 in 1971, valiant freedom fighters belonging to 'Kaderia Bahini' in Tangail attacked two arms, ammunition and fuel-laden ships of the Pakistan occupation army -- ST Razan and SU Engineers LC-3-- on the confluence of the Jamuna and Dhaleswari rivers at Sirajkandi.

Defeating the enemy, they captured huge number of modern arms and ammunition worth around Tk 21 crore (at that time) from the ships and burnt those up, causing a blow to the supply chain of the Pakistani army to the northern region.

Locals started calling the place Jahajmara (destroyer of ships) and commander of the daring operation Habibur Rahman Bir Protik (now late) became famous as 'Jahajmara Habib'.

Visiting the memorial recently, this correspondent saw the plaque has already been covered with algae and weeds. The lightings of the memorial have also gone out of order.

Local people said the memorial was constructed on a filled-up pond of Bangladesh Bridge Authorities and regular plying of sand-laden trucks to and from local dockyard is causing damage to the structure.

"Jahajmara battle is a glorious event in the history of our Liberation War and the new generation should be made aware of it. But the memorial has remained uncared since its construction," said Motahar Hossain, one of the FFs who took part in the historical War.   "We are disappointed to see the dilapidated state of the glorious war memorial installation. We want proper preservation of the place," he added. "The next generation will be deprived of knowing the history of the sacrifices and glory of the Liberation War if the place of the glorious confrontation with the Pakistani army and the actual history of the liberation war are not properly preserved," he added.

Contacted, Al Amin Mohammad Nurul Islam, executive engineer of PWD in Tangail, told The Daily Star that after constructing the memorial plaque in 2013, the department handed over it to the authorities concerned for taking its care.  "As per the procedure, the care taking authorities should inform the PWD in written for holding anything about its developments or other works.

However, none of the authorities or concerned others informed the department about the state of the memorial plaque so far," he said.  "We shall take necessary steps about the memorial plaque after getting the letter," he said

Dr Ataul Gani, deputy commissioner in Tangail, while giving interview to a private television channel in this regard told that necessary steps will be taken to preserve the memorial plaque of the historical battle of the Liberation War.
