Nixon warns Yahya of famine
2021-08-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nixon-warns-yahya-famine-2151791

August 14, 1971

NIXON'S LETTER TO YAHYA

In a letter dated August 14, 1971, US President Richard Nixon advised Pakistan President Yahya Khan to step up relief efforts to avert the risk of famine. Terming it as the "most immediate priority" Nixon said, "This step is fundamental to progress in re-establishing normal conditions. It will help those of us who want to help and will reduce the pretext for interference."

Nixon also advised Yahya to continue to enlist the support of the elected representatives of the East Pakistani people in "the urgent work of national reconciliation".

"All of these measures will be important in countering the corrosive threat of insurgency and restoring peace to your part of the world. They will also hasten the day when the United States and other countries can resume, within a revised national development plan, the task of assisting your country's economic development which has been so tragically complicated and slowed by recent events. In addition, demonstrable progress on the political front will mean that our own counsels of restraint in New Delhi will have a greater chance of success," added Nixon.

POLITICAL SOLUTION OF BANGLADESH

MEANS INDEPENDENCE: RAM

India's Defence Minister Jagjivan Ram emphatically told the Rajya Sabha today that the political solution for Bangladesh meant nothing but independence of that territory. The elected representatives of Bangladesh, he said, had made it clear in unmistakable terms that nothing less than independence would satisfy them.

He further said that India had received seven to eight million people of Bangladesh forced out by the military junta of Pakistan. The only condition to which they could go back to their homeland would be an assurance that their life and property would be safe in Bangladesh.

"That assurance can be there only when they [the refugees] know that Bangladesh is not going to be ruled any more by the military junta of West Pakistan," he emphasised.

As to the Indo-Soviet treaty, the minister told the House that the treaty would serve as a positive deterrent to Pakistan in its act of madness.

PAKISTAN RESENTS THANT'S REMARK ON BANGABANDHU TRIAL

Pakistan protested to the UN Secretary General U Thant that his remarks on the trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had exceeded "the bounds of humanitarian concern and competence of the United Nations".

It may be mentioned here that on August 10, 1971, the secretary general said he shared the feelings of many UN representatives that the fate of Bangabandhu was bound to have repercussions outside Pakistan.

In a protest note Pakistan said today that the UN had never expressed feelings about the repercussions of "sentences after summary trials of political leaders in various countries". "Pakistan cannot accept the proposition that any judicial decision on the individual case of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman will have any repercussions outside the border of Pakistan unless Pakistan's hostile neighbour India encouraged to make them," the protest note said.

The note was the first official reaction by the Pakistan government to international pressure regarding the trial of Bangabandhu.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
