‘Yahya a power maniac’
2021-08-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahya-power-maniac-2151106

August 13, 1971

DOCKER'S BLOCK PAK SHIP

A Pakistani freighter due to dock in Philadelphia was forced to change its course and head for Baltimore after pickets supporting the cause of Bangladesh -- backed by a non-violent fleet of small craft -- occupied the shore and the inlet.

About 50 members of the peace group -- which espoused a complete halt to arms and military shipment to the Government of Pakistan -- grouped at Pier 80 on the Delaware River.

The group launched seven canoes and a kayak in the docking area. It was the group's second action in a week against Pakistani shipping. Earlier, on August 6, 1971, it prevented the freighter Padma from docking in Baltimore.

APPEAL TO INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY

Describing Pakistan President Yahya Khan as a "power maniac", Awami League leader Abdus Samad Azad charged him today with the guilt of waging a war against the unarmed and defenceless 75 million people of Bangladesh.

In a statement appealing to the international community and the UN to exert pressure to save the life of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Azad said he was convinced "the language of reason and persuasion would not prevent Yahya, now turned into a power maniac, from enacting the tragedy".

MASSIVE DEMONSTRATIONS AGAINST BANGABANDHU'S TRIAL

Thousands of men, women and children evacuees from Bangladesh staged massive demonstrations before the Bangladesh mission and the consulates of the USA, the USSR and the UK in Kolkata today demanding release of Bangabandhu. The demonstrations were organised under the auspices of the Bangladesh Liberation Council of the Intelligentsia, the Bangladesh Teachers' Association, and the Bangladesh Film Artists and Technicians Association.

Dr AR Mullick, vice chancellor of Chittagong University, addressing the rally maintained that to justify the murder of Bangabandhu, Pakistan had organised a sham trial. He also pointed out that the evil designs of the Pakistani military junta would not defeat the people's liberation struggle in Bangladesh.

Meanwhile, Bangladesh intellectuals urged Senator Kennedy to exert his influence to free Bangabandhu from Pakistan army custody. Kennedy had about an hourlong meeting with intellectuals yesterday.

ISLAMIC STATES URGED TO SUPPORT BANGLADESH

Twenty Muslim MPs of the Indian parliament appealed to all Muslim countries to raise their voice against the most "un-Islamic acts" of the military junta in Pakistan which had created a situation endangering the peace of the subcontinent.

In a statement, they said, "We feel that Muslim countries' silence may be taken as an approval of all these inhumane atrocities perpetrated by the military junta which is against the basic and fundamental principles of Islam."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
