Serious ‘insurgency movement’ in East Pakistan: Kissinger
2021-08-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/serious-insurgency-movement-east-pakistan-kissinger-2154706

August 18, 1971

KISSINGER'S MEMORANDUM TO NIXON

Henry Kissinger, the US president's assistant for national security affairs, today sent a memorandum to President Richard Nixon discussing implications of the situation in South Asia.

He said a serious "insurgency movement" was underway in the countryside and the Bangalee guerillas were beginning to penetrate the major cities in East Pakistan.

"This has been fed by the Indians in terms of logistics, training and some arms, but basically reflects a strong Bengali will to resist the West Pakistanis. This in turn provokes an army response which stimulates further refugee flow," he added.

Kissinger indicated a shift in India's policy towards Bangladesh and said, "The Indians before March preferred a united Pakistan when they thought the Bengalis might play a dominant role, but now that they judge this is no longer possible they would like to see an independent Bangla Desh as soon as possible."

"The problem with their policy," Kissinger continued, "is that they may be able through their support for the guerrillas to do enough to stalemate a political settlement in East Pakistan but not enough to produce independence."

Against this backdrop, Kissinger recommended, "The only strategy for us to follow in this situation is to concentrate the world's attention on averting famine as an umbrella under which hopefully enough might be done to deprive India of an excuse for intervention and to give Yahya a face-saving way of taking some of the political steps he may have to take if he has to rely on political measures rather than on military control to re-establish normal conditions.

"At this stage in our stance toward China, a US effort to split off part of Pakistan in the name of self-determination would have implications for Taiwan and Tibet in Peking's eyes. It is also important that they not feel that we are lining up with India and the USSR against them. That is why for the moment it is important that we stay one step behind the Soviets in India, although over the longer run, we have no interest in writing off 600 million Indians and Bengalis," added Kissinger.

YAHYA WANTS TO MEET INDIRA

Pakistan President Yahya Khan said he was prepared to meet India Prime Minister Indira Gandhi "to discuss mutual problems in an attempt to defuse the tension".

In an interview at Rawalpindi with the editor of the East African Standard Kenneth Bolton, he said he welcomed the UN secretary general's proposal to station UN observers along the Indian and East Bengal border. The interview was published today.

ANOTHER DIPLOMAT SWITCHES LOYALTY

The acting Pakistani trade commissioner in Hong Kong Mohiuddin Ahmed defected to the Bangladesh government. He accused the Pakistan government of ruthless genocide in East Pakistan.

"We cannot remain a silent spectator while thousands of our countrymen are fighting against oppression," he said in press release published today.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
