AL legislators disqualified
2021-08-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/al-legislators-disqualified-2155751

August 19, 1971

AL LEGISLATORS BARRED

The  Pakistan government today disqualified 195 of the 288 Awami League  members elected to the 310'seat East Pakistani Provincial Assembly. They  were charged with "incitement to murder, rape, kidnapping, attacks on  police posts and banks, armed robbery, rebellion and conspiring with the  enemy".

It said those disqualified would face criminal charges.  The remaining 94 Awami League members would be allowed to hold office as  individuals but not under the party label.

The Pakistan  government's action followed a ban of 79 of the 167 members of the Awami  League elected to the National Assembly in December, 1970. The assembly  never met as the West Pakistani troops began a military crackdown on  March 25, 1971 in the province.

US AMBASSADOR CALLS ON YAHYA

The US Ambassador to Pakistan Joseph Farland today called on Pakistan President Yahya Khan.

Yahya  claimed that there was not at this time a continuing flow of refugees  leaving East Pakistan. Indians were mounting attacks against Pakistan,  preventing refugees from returning, arming guerrillas, and misleading  the world as to the nature of the refugee situation, he added.

He  further said that to date his government had not been successful in  getting its case across to the international press of the many  constructive things that they were attempting to do in East Pakistan.  "Pakistan government makes the information available but the New York  Times doesn't print it. In order to put their case forward they have to  buy space in American newspapers," lamented Yahya.

President  Yahya went on to discuss his plans to associate Bangalees in  administration of the province by clearing 88 of the former Awami League  representatives to National Assembly. Asked if it was possible that  more than 88 might be cleared, he said all the others were being  specifically charged with crimes but that it was possible that they  could clear themselves of these charges and then take their seat in the  next National Assembly. He said only some 15 or 16 of the 88 were  presently in Dhaka and they were being protected by the government since  they feared for their lives. The rest of the 88 were either in the  countryside or in India. He did not know how many of them would come  forward to claim their seat but he supposed he would have to set some  kind of a deadline on this.

Referring to Yahya's comment regarding  civilian participation in the Government of East Pakistan, the US  Ambassador suggested that any announcement which Yahya planned to make  on this subject should carry with it a restatement of the entire  "package" which the Government of Pakistan had promulgated to date, and  that the same should be so tailored as to get maximum news impact both  in Pakistan, India and in the Western world. Yahya replied by stating  that, "I think this is an excellent suggestion and I'll do it."

OPERATION SHALDA RIVER

The  freedom fighters of K Force today ambushed three boats carrying  Pakistani troops. Twenty Pakistani soldiers were killed in the  operation. The freedom fighters took control of the area.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
