Yahya discusses trial of Bangabandhu
2021-08-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahya-discusses-trial-bangabandhu-2156466

August 20, 1971

TRIAL OF BANGABANDHU

In a telegram sent today to the US Department of State, Joseph Farland, the US ambassador to Pakistan, provided an interesting detail of his discussion with Pakistan President Yahya Khan about the trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The one-on-one meeting took place on August 19, 1971.

Farland told Yahya that as a friend, he felt strongly obligated to suggest that Bangabandhu not be executed. Such an action, Farland continued, would be contrary to the best interests of Yahya's government as well as to his own "best personal interests".

Yahya replied that he wanted Farland to know (and for the US Government to know, but only on the highest levels) that the concern in that regard was unfounded. He said he had gotten the most qualified Pakistani attorney, AK Brohi, to act as defence counsel, that the military tribunal had been advised that the trial must be conducted with the greatest care, without bias or prejudgment, and that the record must be in full substantiation of whatever verdict was reached.

Yahya further stated that because the charge carried the possibility of a death sentence, it was his plan that if such the verdict be, a request for mercy would be made on Bangabandhu's behalf, and that Yahya would accept the petition. Yahya observed that when this request for mercy, as aforesaid, would reach him he would "sit on it for a few months" without making a decision until power was turned over to a civilian government.

It was Yahya's further observation that once the problem of Bangabandhu's mercy petition became the problem of a civilian government, there was little or no possibility that he would be executed, reported Farland.

The American Ambassador finished his comments with the remark: "From what you have told me it is obvious that you have given considerable thought to a solution of this problem."

Yahya replied, "I have, and you can stop worrying because I am not going to execute the man even though he is a traitor."

SHYAMNAGAR DEBACLE

Bangladeshi freedom fighters faced a major setback today as Pakistani troops attacked one of their hideouts at Shyamnagar in the Sundarbans forest area, killing 51 and capturing nine. The troops made a surprise attack with the assistance of local collaborators.

Those taken prisoner were reported, according to Radio Pakistan, to have said the camp had been commanded by a captain from the East Pakistan Rifles.

13 AWAMI MNAS ASKED TO ANSWER CHARGES

The Pakistani military junta today ordered the last 13 of the 79 disqualified Awami League members of the National Assembly (MNAs) to appear before the Martial Law Authorities to answer charges of criminal offences. Radio Pakistan said Martial Law Administrator Lt Gen Tikka Khan had directed the 13, including a woman member (Nurjahan Murshid), to appear before the authorities. If they failed to do so, they would be tried in absentia, added Radio Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
