Reluctant candidates in Dhaka
2021-08-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/reluctant-candidates-dhaka-2157626

August 22, 1971

SHIP SABOTAGE SHATTERED PAKISTAN

The Daily Telegraph reported that no candidates could be found for the 79 constituencies which had been declared vacant by the Martial Law Authority in East Pakistan. Civil servants and the more "dovish" members of the martial law authorities had so far been unable to persuade people to stand as candidates, either for the Muslim League or one of the other recognised parties, added the report.

The London-based daily commented, "For it is well known that candidates will be wide open to threats and harassment from the Mukti Fouj guerrillas. Supporters of Bangladesh are likely, too, to make the life of any candidate's family difficult and unpleasant, even if they do not use bullets or bombs."

In another report, the daily stated that supply ship sabotage shattered confidence of West Pakistan. It may be mentioned here that Bangladeshi guerrillas had sunk several Pakistani supply vessels in the previous week, seriously interrupting the flow of soldiers and military supplies from West to East Pakistan.

The guerrillas had also begun attacks on well-guarded military targets. Nearly a thousand minor bridges and culverts, and 157 major road and rail bridges had been destroyed. The army had not been able to repair the most important of the rail bridges, connecting the main port of Chittagong with Dhaka. It was becoming increasingly difficult to transport all kinds of foodstuffs and supplies from the ports, reported The Daily Telegraph.

THAILAND TURNS DOWN PAK REQUEST FOR FUEL

Pakistan had proposed Thailand that every day 12 Pakistan aircraft would each take 26,000 gallons of aviation fuel from the country. But Thailand turned it down saying that they would not like to be involved in Pakistani affairs. Recent disclosures about the killings of Buddhists in the Chattogram region had made many Thai citizens acutely aware of Pak barbarity in East Pakistan.

GUERRILLA RAID AT LOUHAJANG

The Associated Press (AP) today reported that Bangladeshi forces attacked and set ablaze a police station and another government building at Louhajang, 30 miles from Dhaka.

The reports said the guerrillas made government forces retreat after a fierce gun battle on August 21 night. They then moved into the two buildings and burned them to the ground, destroying all records.

NIXON NAMES 6 FOR STUDY OF US AID TO PAKISTAN

American President Nixon named a panel of six to review steps already taken by the United States to help the millions made homeless by the war in East Pakistan and to make recommendations for further assistance, reported The New York Times.

REFUGEE COUNT RISES IN INDIA

The number of Bangladeshi refugees who had entered entered India was believed to have reached eight million, Indian government officials declared today.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
