New recognition bid by Bangladesh govt
2021-08-23T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/new-recognition-bid-bangladesh-govt-2158366

August 23, 1971

DELHI CONSULTS BANGLADESH LEADERS

India has been consulting the leaders of the Bangladesh government to find out how, if at all, the issue of Bangladesh could be raised before the world's highest forum -- the United Nations General Assembly beginning next month in New York. The Indian foreign office believes that the issue would be broached before the General Assembly by one country or another and might even be referred to one of the many committees of the UN.

BID FOR RECOGNITION

The Bangladesh Government-in-exile is planning to make another bid in September for the recognition of Bangladesh by foreign countries. According to sources close to the Bangladesh government, the Mukti Bahini would soon be able to demonstrate that it controlled a very large part of the Bangladesh territory. Foreign correspondents would then be invited to Bangladesh as the first step of a renewed bid for recognition.

A Bangladesh spokesperson recently claimed that his government would be able to persuade India and the Soviet Union to accord recognition to the government. The spokesman also said that the Bangladesh government would also appeal to those who recognise it to help the Mukti Bahini to organise its air force and naval wings.

BANGLADESH MINISTER PLEASED

WITH FIGHTERS' SPIRIT

M Mansur Ali, finance minister of Bangladesh, today expressed deep satisfaction over the firm determination of the young guerilla trainees to fight to the last drop of their blood to liberate Bangladesh. The minister, who recently visited different training camps inside Bangladesh, said, "I have been deeply impressed by the profound enthusiasm shown by thousands of young men who stood in long queues to enrol themselves as trainees in guerrilla warfare. The recruits are also picking up guerrilla techniques within an unbelievably short time."

Some of the youngsters, who recently carried out daring operations, told Mansur Ali that Pakistani troops now appeared to be completely shaken and did not even dare to put up any formidable resistance against their guerrilla onslaughts.

YAHYA SEEKS DONORS TO STOCKPILE BLOOD

Pakistan President Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan asked Pakistanis to donate blood for "all contingencies", and political observers saw the appeal as a veiled warning that war with India might be imminent, reported The New York Times.

Under banner headlines, Pakistani newspapers reported the president's appeal today and said other signatories included East Pakistan Governor Lt Gen Tikka Khan, and a number of right‐wing politicians.

During the last few days, the government had announced a series of blackout and air‐raid drills in principal Pakistani cities.

According to various unofficial sources, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was now on trial at military garrison near Lyallpur. An announcement of his conviction on charges of "waging war against Pakistan" was likely to create tension in East Pakistan and in the already hostile Pakistani‐Indian relations, said The New York Times.

HAMIDUL HUQ RECALLED TO LEAD UN DELEGATION

Pakistan's foreign ministry disclosed that Hamidul Huq Chowdhury, who was foreign minister 15 years ago and, currently, owner of Pakistan Observer, was being recalled to public life to lead Pakistan's delegation to the UN General Assembly next month. Chowdhury, as an East Pakistani, would have evident merit in the Pakistan government's eyes as a spokesman in the international forum on the events in East Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
