Indira writes to Chou on Bangladesh
2021-08-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-writes-chou-bangladesh-2159361

August 24, 1971

INDIRA'S LETTER TO CHOU

Indira Gandhi made yet another important breakthrough by writing directly to her counterpart in China, Premier Chou En-lai, on Bangladesh affairs. This is the first time an Indian prime minister had sent a communication to China since the Sino-Indian conflict of 1962. Indira Gandhi's communication was said to have been on the line of the one addressed to the heads of states or government of many countries in June and July, highlighting the humanitarian aspect of refugees from East Pakistan, the financial burden imposed on India because of 8 million refugees and the need for the creation of conditions for their return home.

$200M CHINESE LOAN FOR PAKISTANI PROJECTS

Pakistan had submitted to China a list of projects to be financed from the $200 million loan offered in November, 1970. Pakistan President Yahya Khan's economic adviser MM Ahmed told the Associated Press of Pakistan today that China had sent a team to Pakistan for the study and investigation of these projects. Ahmed said 33 percent of the loan was in the form of commodity under which various items had been brought including three coasters which had already arrived in Chittagong. China would also supply one lakh tonnes of rice for East Pakistan, he added.

MUKTI BAHINI READY TO MEET FRESH OFFENSIVE

Five months after the Martial Law regime's crackdown in Bangladesh the Mukti Bahini emerged as a fiery force and fought the Pakistani army of occupation to a near standstill. A Mukti Bahini spokesman said the Mukti Bahini was fully prepared to meet any fresh offensive by the Pakistani forces after the monsoon. The spokesman estimated the Pakistani toll of dead and injured in all sectors of Bangladesh at about 30,000.

He pointed out that the Martial Law regime had no civil administration anywhere in Bangladesh except a puppet show in Dhaka.

BANGLADESH YOUTH CAMP INAUGURATED

A Bangladeshi youth camp jointly sponsored by Gandhi Peace Foundation and Bangladesh Volunteer Service Corps was inaugurated in Calcutta.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
