Bangladesh allowance for Rebel Poet Nazrul
2021-08-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-allowance-rebel-poet-nazrul-2160161

August 25, 1971

REBEL POET HONOURED

The Bangladesh government decided today to grant 350 rupees as monthly allowance to Rebel Poet Kazi Nazrul Islam, now ailing in Kolkata. A spokesperson of the exiled government said the allowance was "a mark of deep love and regard of the people of Bangladesh for the rebel poet". The decision was taken at a cabinet meeting.

FRESH REFUGEE FLOW INTO MEGHALAYA

A fresh influx of refugees from Bangladesh into Meghalaya was reported today. An estimated 5,000 refugees, mostly of the working-class population, crossed over to the Balat sector of Meghalaya in the last 24 hours. Giving this information, the Deputy Commissioner of Khasi and Jaintia Hills district of Meghalaya said today the government had information that an estimated 50,000 more refugees were on their way to the Meghalaya border from Bangladesh.

CALL TO BOYCOTT PAKISTAN-BOUND SHIPS

The International Transport Workers Federation (ITF) issued a directive to all seafarers and dockers calling upon them to refuse to load cargoes of war material destined for West Pakistan as soon as and as effectively as it was possible for them to do so.

BANDARNAIKE'S LETTER TO YAHYA

The Prime Minister of Sri Lanka Sirimavo Bandarnaike expressed concern to Pakistan President Yahya Khan over the secret military trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Bandarnaike was one of the 32 heads of states and governments who Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi had addressed over Bangabandhu's trial.

CHINA PROVES UNWORTHY OF SOCIALIST LEADERSHIP

Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra today derided China for betraying the cause of Bangladesh's liberation struggle. It said, "It is amazing to note the dearth of suggestions from China camp for the 75 million people of Bangladesh. What, these so-called socialists think, should the people of Bangladesh do? They are being massacred without respite, without trial unless they belong to such communal and reactionary hordes as the Jamat-i-Islami and Muslim League or unless they agree to become out-and-out traitors of the people. Their properties are being looted or expropriated under one pretext or another. Their sisters and wives are being brutally raped. What must they do faced with such a terrible fate? Do these Chinese and the Sinophiles want them to lick Pakistani boots and beg mercy, mercy that they may not be blessed with, just because that would help the Chinese foreign policy? Well, sorry, we refuse to do that. We refuse to do that because history tells us to wage this war. This is a just war because it is a struggle for people's liberation."

The clandestine radio station further said, "We have no doubt that with this act against the people of Bangladesh, China has put herself on the dock of history. She had a great role to play. A role to lead the downtrodden of the world toward a great future. But she has now proved herself unworthy of such noble leadership. This is, indeed, the most shameful phase in China's history."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
