Bangladesh mission at London
2021-08-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-mission-london-2161911

August 27, 1971

LONDON MISSION INAUGURATED

Pakistan is now dead and two countries have been born in its place, said Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, speaking today at the inaugural function of the Bangladesh Mission in London. Justice Chowdhury was the overseas representative of the Bangladesh government. Although the Bangladesh government had not yet received any official international recognition, the mission in London intended to carry out diplomatic activities there.

Justice Chowdhury described the detention of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman by the Pakistani authorities as illegal, and called for his immediate release.

LATIN AMERICAN PARLIAMENT CONDEMNS BANGLADESH GENOCIDE

The Latin American Parliament at Caracas, Venezuela today unanimously passed a resolution condemning the brutal suppression of human rights, the massive genocide, the deliberate liquidation of politically conscious elements and of intellectuals and the imposition of a reign of terror in East Pakistan by the Pakistan army.

They also called upon the Government of Pakistan to desist from committing further violation of human rights and of law and justice, stop military repression, respect the life of the Bangabandhu, and enter into immediate negotiations with the already elected representatives of the people with the objective of achieving a political solution acceptable to East Pakistan.

The Latin American Parliament urged the international community to extend aid to the refugees sheltered by India and to the suffering people of East Pakistan and to exercise all their influence over the Government of Pakistan with the objective of achieving a rapid political solution.

ON THE FRONT LINE

Mukti Bahini today raided Ranamati near Phulbari in Mymensingh district and killed 15 Pakistani soldiers. They also raided the Pakistan position in Kamalpur and inflicted 11 casualties the previous day.

In Sylhet district, Mukti Bahini today ambushed Pakistan troops near Manu and inflicted five casualties. Another Mukti Bahini group raided Razakar patrol party three miles north of Tamarjuni and inflicted six casualties. Mukti Bahini also ambushed the Pakistan patrol in Kanairghat today and wounded three Pakistani troops.

In Noakhali district, Mukti Bahini today ambushed 15 Pakistani civilian vehicles carrying supplies for Pakistani troops in Feni-Belonia area and damaged almost all vehicles. They apprehended two Pakistani supporters.

In Kushtia district, Mukti Bahini today killed local peace committee chairman at Pataldanga.

Bangladeshi guerrillas today also destroyed railway tracks in Nakurgachi in North Bengal. In another attack, Mukti Bahini blew up 70 feet of railway tracks between Bhawanipur and Jharbari in Dinajpur district.

KEATING DENIES FRESH ISSUE OF ARMS LICENCE TO PAKISTAN

The US Ambassador to India Kenneth B Keating today categorically asserted that no more arms licences were being issued to Pakistan by the USA "nor are old ones renewed as they expire". Writing in his weekly column in the American Reporter, Keating also denied the allegations that the USA had been 1) giving counter-insurgency training to Pakistani military officers; 2) diverting arms from South Vietnam to Pakistan, and 3) planning to send American troops from South Vietnam to Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
