‘A dangerous and volatile situation’
2021-08-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-mission-london-2162531

August 28, 1971

BANGLADESH SHOULD HAVE SELF-GOVERNMENT: PERCY

US Senator Charles Percy today called for the rights of self-determination of the people of Bangladesh. "The will of the electorate must be carried out," he said.

The Republican Senator told a press conference at the US Embassy in New Delhi that he would prefer a total suspension of economic assistance and military hardware sales to Pakistan by the USA. He added that a "dangerous and volatile situation" had risen in the Subcontinent which might threaten the world peace. He emphasised the presence of the United Nations in East Pakistan so that it could help create conditions for the safe return of Bangladeshi refugees. Earlier, the Senator had extensively visited refugee camps in West Bengal, Assam and Tripura.

PAK CONCERN AT OPENING OF BANGLADESH MISSION

Pakistan's High Commissioner in London, Salman Ali, today called on Joseph Godber, a Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, and expressed his concern at the opening of the Bangladesh High Commission in London. A British Foreign Office spokesman informed, Godber assured the High Commissioner that since the British Government recognise the Government of Pakistan no mission of the kind described was acknowledged by Britain.

MUJIB A LEAF IN A STORM: BROHI

A.K. Brohi, the lawyer whom Pakistani President Yahya Khan assigned to defend Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, firmly believed that Mujib was only a leaf in a storm tossed about by forces within his Awami League. He said in an interview with newsmen in Karachi that much of the Awami League was influenced by Maulana Bhashani and by Naxalites, and that Sheikh Mujib had no alternative but to toe the line. Mujib's six-point programme was not contrary to the integrity of Pakistan, he claimed. But the will of a section of his party for secession triumphed over the wish of the electorate, for a threat to the life of the Pakistani state was not the electoral mandate he had been given, added Brohi.

ON THE WAR FRONT

A railway track near Mirsharai was mined by freedom fighters today. A train carrying Pakistani soldiers and Razakars was derailed by the mine explosion. It was learnt that the Pakistanis had suffered 35 casualties in the action.

In Mymensingh district, Bangaldeshi freedom fighters today removed telephone line between Bakshiganj-Kamalpur. Another group of Bangladeshi guerillas raided Nalitabad and killed three members of the Badar Bahini. A heavy fighting between Mukti Bahini and Pakistani troops was reported in Berigaon area in Mymensingh.

In Sylhet, Mukti Bahini ambushed Razakar patrol in Lamukta today and killed 3 Razakars.

In Dinajpur district, Mukti Bahini raided Pak position in Bhurungamari and inflicted two casualties.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
