‘Famine inevitable’
2021-08-31T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/famine-inevitable-2164766

August 31, 1971

VIRTUAL RECOGNITION GIVEN TO BANGLADESH MISSION: INDIRA

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi told Bangladeshi refugees in Cooch Behar today that India was doing all it could do to promote the cause of the Bangladesh liberation struggle.

She pointed out that India had virtually recognised the Bangladesh diplomatic mission in Calcutta. She, therefore, did not understand why there was so much fuss over giving recognition to Bangladesh.

FAMINE FEARED IN BANGLADESH

The Telegraph (London) today reported that with an acute shortage of foodstuff already in parts of Bangladesh, a winter famine in isolated areas was inevitable. The recent severe floods had added to the dangers of famine. The rice crop from 2,600,000 acres had been lost. Many foreigners were deeply disturbed by the refusal of Lt Gen Tikka Khan, military governor of occupied Bangladesh, to allow food to be distributed by foreign voluntary organisations working under the United Nations, added the newspaper.

UK NEWSPAPERS' DISTRIBUTION IN PAKISTAN STOPPED

The British high commission in Rawalpindi announced that it had halted the distribution of all British newspapers and periodicals following a censorship move against foreign publication by the Pakistan government.

Pakistan had asked the commission to cease circulation of newspapers containing articles directed against Pakistan. A similar request had been made in a circular letter to all foreign missions in Pakistan.

Radio Pakistan today said the British high commissioner in Islamabad was summoned to the foreign office yesterday and was asked to convey its dissatisfaction to his government. Without naming the newly started Bangladesh mission in London, Pakistan accused Britain of having allowed a foreign mission to operate from its soil.

Other Pakistani accusations against Britain included British encouragement to forces aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of Pakistan, allowing demonstrations in Britain against Pakistan, allowing funds to be raised for purchase of arms to be used against Pakistan and allowing time on BBC and British television for anti-Pakistan propaganda.

UNICEF MOVES TO PROVIDE SHELTER TO 3M REFUGEES

Nearly three million Bangladeshi refugees in India would have a roof over their heads by the beginning of September, UNICEF announced. A UNICEF statement said many Bangalee refugees lacked the most elementary form of shelter from the monsoon rains. Among UNICEF materials now arriving in India were some 1,75,000 tarpaulins, each capable of giving protection to around 15 people.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
