Bangladesh mission opened in New Delhi
2021-08-30T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-mission-opened-new-delhi-2164146

August 30, 1971

BANGLADESH MISSION IN NEW DELHI

The Bangladesh mission was formally opened in New Delhi today. In the solemn, simple and touching flag-hoisting ceremony the green-red-gold flag broke at the mast with a choral rendition of the Bangladesh national anthem. The ceremony started with recitations from the Holy Quran, the Gita, the Bible and the Tripitaka.

The mission was housed, temporarily, at the residence of KM Shehabuddin, the Bangladesh government representative in New Delhi.

Before hoisting the flag, Shehabuddin read out a statement in which he expressed the determination of the people of Bangladesh to drive out the Pakistani enemy from their land. "We have shed much blood and are ready to give more," he added.

He thanked India for her sympathy and support to the new state, and asked all nations to stop assistance, both military and economic, to Pakistan.

Shehabuddin said in his statement: "Though at this hour, we are hoisting our national flag on a separate building with a view to avoiding embarrassment to our host government I wish to assert very clearly that I, on behalf of my government, lay full claim to the high commission premise along with the buildings inside them at Chanakyapuri, New Delhi hitherto belonging to defunct Pakistan, and on the so-called Pakistan House at Tilak Marg, New Delhi  as the rightful property of Bangladesh. These palatial buildings, like similar missions in other capitals, were built by the rulers of Pakistan with the foreign exchange earned by the jute and tea of Bangladesh and so none has greater right to them than the people of Bangladesh."

BRITISH MP MEETS TAJUDDIN

Peter Shore, Labour MP and former British minister, had lengthy talks with Bangladesh Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed today. It was learnt that they reviewed all aspects of the liberation struggle with particular emphasis on the probable steps which might be taken by the friendly countries overseas to help secure a free and democratic Bangladesh.

INDIA TRYING FOR SAFE RETURN OF REFUGEES: INDIRA

India Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, during her visit to refugee camps today, said India was making an all-out effort to create global pressure to solve the Bangladesh problem so that the refugees could safely return to their homeland.

Indira told Bangladeshi refugees that the people of India were against their forcible return to Bangladesh in their present distress. She said despite many internal and external problems with which India was heavily burdened, the Indian people always supported the democratic cause of Bangladesh. She, however, asked the refugees not to be complacent but to be ready to sacrifice everything for the independence of Bangladesh.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
