No instance of Zia firing a single shot at Pakistani forces in 1971: PM
2021-08-31T15:33:07+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/anti-liberation-war-forces-still-conspiring-against-bangladesh-pm-2165186

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today urged all to remain vigilant as anti-Liberation War forces, along with their associates, are still conspiring against Bangladesh with assistance from abroad.

"War criminals, defeated forces, August 15 (1975) killers, and their offspring are still conspiring against Bangladesh. They are plotting against the country," she said.

The Prime Minister said this while addressing a programme of Bangladesh Chhatra League (BCL) at Krishibid Institution, Bangladesh (KIB), marking National Mourning Day.

She joined the programme virtually from her official residence Gono Bhaban.

Hasina said the evil forces are supported by international forces who acted against Bangladesh's Liberation War. "The nation must remain vigilant about it."

Referring to the nation-building efforts of the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, she said the defeated forces (of the Liberation War) staged the August 15 massacre when they saw Bangladesh cannot be stopped from its economic march forward. "We have to move forward keeping that in mind."

The Prime Minister alerted all that Bangladesh has many enemies and massive hurdles in every step of its development journey.

"Our path to progress is not smooth. Rather, it is full of hurdles, but we have to move forward overcoming all the odds, and we are doing that," she said, adding that Bangladesh has stood out on the world stage in the last 12 years.

Talking about BNP founder and former president Ziaur Rahman and his role in the Liberation War, Hasina said there is no instance of Ziaur Rahman firing a single shot at the Pakistani forces.

She mentioned that Mustaq, Rashid and Farooq during their interviews with the BBC admitted that Ziaur Rahman was always with them. "Zia was the source of all power (for them)," she said.

The PM wondered how they -- who had always visited Bangabandhu's house for various purposes, including personal matters -- could kill the Father of the Nation.

Sheikh Hasina, the chief patron of BCL, asked the activists and leaders to work for the country imbued with patriotism and follow the ideals of the Father of the Nation.

Awami League presidium members Jahangir Kabir Nanak and Abdur Rahman, BCL president Al Nahean Khan Joy, and general secretary Lekhak Bhattacharjee also spoke at the programme.

At the beginning of the programme, a minute of silence was observed to pay respect to the martyrs of the August 15 massacre.

The Prime Minister, earlier, unveiled the covers of "Matribhumi" and "Joy Bangla Magazine".
