When my soldiers kill, they do it cleanly: Yahya
2021-09-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/when-my-soldiers-kill-they-do-it-cleanly-yahya-2165591

September 1, 1971

NEW GOVERNOR IN EAST PAKISTAN

Pakistan President General Yahya Khan appointed Dr Abdul Motaleb Malik as the civil governor of East Pakistan. Malik had no say in the martial law administration. The two posts were bifurcated. Lt Gen Niazi took over the charge of the Martial Law Administration. As the head of civil administration Dr Malik had hardly anything to do as civil administration did not exist.

BANGLADESH PEOPLE HOPE INDIA WILL DO MORE: TAJUDDIN

The people of Bangladesh hope that India will "do more in support" of their liberation struggle and that the Soviet Union will give them all possible help, Bangladesh Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmed said.

He also appealed to the people of the world to "intensify their actions of solidarity with people of Bangladesh".

Tajuddin made the appeal while replying to questions put to him by the World Peace Council Secretary General Romesh Chandra, who called on him recently. The text of the interview was made available in New Delhi today.

The Bangladesh prime minister welcomed the Indo-Soviet friendship treaty "signed by two great countries, both our valued friends, on whose support we count much in our struggle for national liberation".

He added, "In our fight for national independence, peace and prosperity and for the end of all exploitation we believe that the Indo-Soviet treaty will greatly help us. India, we are sure, will do more in support of our struggle. The Soviet Union in the past came in aid of the oppressed people's struggle for emancipation. Naturally we could rely on the Soviet Union to give our people's just struggle all possible help."

Tajuddin Ahmed reiterated that the struggle was for complete national liberation. "It is only a matter of time when we shall be completely free."

DHAKA KILLING NO FOOTBALL MATCH: YAHYA

"What happened in Dhaka was no football match. ... When my soldiers kill, they do it cleanly," Pakistan President Yahya Khan said today, reported Reuters.

In an interview published in the French daily Le Figaro today, Yahya said Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman "is in prison ... and alive" and "that one should just take my word for it". He described Bangabandhu as a "minor fascist".

"I want to warn the world that if the Indians imagine they can take any parcel of our territory without provoking a war they are committing a grave error... This will mean war, a total war that I hate. But for the defence of my country, I will not hesitate," stated Yahya.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
