Bangladesh’s reply to Yahya
2021-09-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladeshs-reply-yahya-2167931

September 4, 1971

BANGLADESH MISSION PRESENTS CHEQUE TO KAZI NAZRUL ISLAM

Hossain Ali, the chief of the Bangladesh mission in Kolkata, today presented to the sons of Kazi Nazrul Islam a cheque for 2,100 rupees as pension for the poet. The amount represents a monthly grant of 350 rupees to the ailing poet for the last six months, since when the Pakistan government had stopped the grant after the army crackdown in Bangladesh on March 25, 1971. In his brief speech Hossain Ali paid glowing tribute to the writings of Nazrul Islam, which he believed would inspire all Bangladeshis to fight till freedom was attained.

'IT IS PLAIN SADISM'

Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra today gave a befitting reply to Yahya's recent interview with Paris-based right-wing newspaper Le Figaro. In that interview Yahya viciously attacked Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, calling him a "criminal" and a "minor fascist".

The Swadhin Bangla Betar said, "He [the Le Figaro correspondent] should also have reminded the major fascist [Yahya Khan] that if Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman did not believe in democratic processes he could have made mincemeat out of these Pakistani fascists if he wanted. It's his civilised behaviour that has given the major fascist the opportunity to breathe air in Islamabad instead of pushing up the daisies.

"It is indeed an irony of history that one of the world's most cowardly killers and despicable liars now sits in judgement of a defender of democracy. Until now crime has not only paid but it seems to have allowed enough latitude for such intolerable effrontery. But history also shows that things do change for better at long last. Otherwise today we would have had Hitlers, Mussolinis and Tojos settling the destiny of mankind," added the station.

In reply to Yahya's shameless boasting about his soldiers' Nazi-style massacre of the people of Bangladesh, the clandestine radio run by the exiled Bangladesh government said, "Using typically army mess lingo he [Yahya] boasted that 'it was no football match'. Unfortunately, 'Le Figaro' correspondent failed to remind him that his barbarous army was let loose on an unarmed and unsuspecting civilian population and that only a cowardly army would declare war on women and children. The correspondent should also have reminded this major fascist that his animals in army uniforms not only did the killing with professional efficiency but also displayed great talent in rape, loot and arson. Cruelty with a great purpose may be called efficiency but, otherwise, it is plain sadism."

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini exchanged fire with enemy troops in Nawagram area today killing 13 Pakistani troops. On the same day they raided Pakistani troops' position in Atgram area and exchanged fire with them inflicting heavy casualties.

In Dinajpur district, Mukti Bahini raided Parlia and Amarkhana today and killed six Pakistani troops. They blew up railway tracks between Chirirbandar and Parvatipur and paralysed train communication.

In Sylhet, freedom fighters blew up railway tracks between Chhatak and Sylhet, and paralysed rail communication between these important places.

US LONGSHOREMEN TO BOYCOTT PAKISTANI  ARMS SHIPS

The International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union directed all its members not to load or handle any ships carrying military supplies and weapons from the Pacific coast of the USA which could be used against the people of Bangladesh. The ILWU which controlled the port and dock workers at the ports on the Pacific coast of the USA deplored the butchery and the uprooting of millions of Bangladeshis from their homes and lands by the armed forces of Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
