Nazrul’s family refuses pension from Pakistan
2021-09-03T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nazruls-family-refuses-pension-pakistan-2167241

September 3, 1971

YAHYA'S MONEY UNTOUCHABLE: NAZRUL'S SON

Kazi Sabyashachi, son of rebel poet Kazi Nazrul Islam, outright rejected today Pakistan's offer to renew payment of monthly allowances to the poet. He said they would not touch the blood-stained money of Pakistan.

Kazi Sabyashachi said in a statement: "I am surprised at the audacity of Pakistan proposing to renew payment of monthly allowance to my father, who has been in bed for the several years.

"It is known to all that in poems, songs and other writings, Nazrul Islam has been the embodiment of Bengal's cultural and revolutionary spirit, sought to be crushed today by the barbarous army of Pakistan in Bangladesh. Whatever difficulties we may have to face we shall not touch any of Pakistan's money stained with the blood of innocent millions."

Radio Pakistan reported yesterday quoting an official spokesman in Islamabad, that payment of monthly allowance to the poet "had been resumed through the Pakistan high commission in New Delhi".

When Pakistan stopped the allowance, the Bangladesh government-in-exile announced an allowance to the ailing poet. The Government of West Bengal had for a long time been giving a pension to the poet.

BHUTTO WARNS YAHYA

Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto warned the Yahya Khan regime that his party would not accept "any gimmick" in civilianisation of the administration in West Pakistan. Commenting on the appointment of Dr AM Malik as governor of East Bengal, Bhutto said the mere appointment of a civilian governor was not an adequate step towards civilianisation. It might be a step "in the right direction" if other steps towards genuine civilianisation were also taken.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today exchanged fire with Pakistan troops in Darsha in Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna sector and killed six Pakistani soldiers.

In the Dhaka-Chittagong sector, they raided Latifpur, Ghazipur, Banghara, Bagber, Koteshwar, Jambari , Solla, Noapur Bazar killing 51 enemies and injuring many.

'INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY SHOULD INTERVENE NOW'

HL Kirkley, director of Oxfam, in a letter published today in the Times (London), appealed to the international community to come forward to avert total famine in East Pakistan.

"This situation is clearly beyond the control of individuals and private agencies, but there is a role for lesser groups to continue pressure for governmental and international action which could stave off famine now," he said.

"Indeed, the greatest problem is not the material shortage, which this technological generation could adequately combat, but the twin problems of starting up the lumbering machine of international compassion and then maintaining public and government interest. Refugees who are hungry today are likely to be hungry every day for a long time. Public response is inclined to be in the form of one instinctive donation and then forgetfulness," he added.

USA DOUBLING FOOD RELIEF FOR EAST PAKISTAN

The USA was doubling its food relief programme for the war-torn East Pakistan, a senior state department official disclosed today. Deputy Administrator Maurice Williams, speaking to reporters after returning from the region where the food problem was now compounded by major flooding, said it appeared that a very large famine could occur. The USA was negotiating a new Food for Peace agreement totalling $40 million to supply wheat and edible oils to East Pakistan.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
