Tajuddin urges states to recognise
2021-09-05T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/tajuddin-urges-states-recognise-2168641

September 5, 1971

TAJUDDIN'S RADIO BROADCAST

Prime Minister of Bangladesh Tajuddin Ahmed, in a broadcast today, appealed to all nations to accord recognition to Bangladesh to accelerate the pace of the freedom movement. He maintained that the liberation struggle had reached a decisive stage and victory was in sight. "It is easy to see that recognition is a means to an end which is a speedy and victorious conclusion of the war of liberation," he said.

Tajuddin alleged that the Pakistan government was utilising much of the relief materials to sustain the occupation troops.

He also blamed the UN for channelising the relief through the Pakistan government "which had no scruple in pressing into service relief helicopters, vessels and vehicles in its campaign of suppression against Bengalis."

On the Pakistani action of unseating some national and provincial assembly members and leaving others to retain their seats, Tajuddin Ahmed said that the elected representatives derived their authority from the expressed will of the people and were neither subject to a usurper's rule nor to his make-believe methods designed to produce a false impression that those who were not unseated by him were supporters of his regime.

YAHYA'S LIMITED AMNESTY OFFER

President Yahya Khan today granted amnesty to all persons accused of anti-state activities during 'disturbances' between March 1 and September 5 except for those already charged.

Officials said that Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was not included in the amnesty order. The amnesty also did not apply to members of the National Assembly and Provincial Assembly of the eastern wing of Pakistan.

A number of people held for offences alleged to have been committed in the 'disturbances' in East Pakistan were released today from detention camps and jails in Dhaka, Cumilla, Jashore, Chattogram, Natore, and Rangpur. The release followed the general amnesty signed by President Yahya Khan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In Rangpur-Dinajpur Sector, Muktibahini today killed 4 Pakistani soldiers in Dimapara area. They also demolished two transmission towers in Thakurgaon and Pirganj disrupting power supplies.

On the same day, Muktibahini successfully engaged enemy troops moving in vehicles towards East Godagari-Barakhata and killed 8 troops.

Muktibahini also damaged roads between Phultola-Thakurgaon.

In Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna sector, Muktibahini exchanged fire with Pakistani troops in Goalhati area. As a result, 5 enemy soldiers were killed. In Asra area they killed one troop on the same day.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
