Yahya’s ‘amnesty’ trap
2021-09-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahyas-amnesty-trap-2169376

September 6, 1971

BANGLADESH MISSION BECOMES HIGH COMMISSION

The Bangladesh mission in Calcutta would henceforth be designated as high commission for the Bangladesh government, a Bangladesh government spokesperson announced today. This was the first high commission of Bangladesh in a foreign country. The Bangladesh mission came into existence in Calcutta on April 18, 1971 following the transfer of allegiance by some of the Pakistan high commission staff to the Bangladesh government. M Hossain Ali, the current chief of the Bangladesh mission, would be re-designated as the high commissioner for Bangladesh. He would present his credentials to the Indian government as soon as India recognises the Bangladesh government.

'AMNESTY' FAILS TO DECEIVE

Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra today deplored Pakistan President Yahya Khan's "amnesty" offer and said, "Yahya must be in a desperate plight to resort to such silly trickery.

"The trick looks a great deal more stupid than that 'refuge -reception centre' gimmick where foreign correspondents found only dogs responding to Pakistani hospitality," added the Radio.

"Now either Yahya must be a fool," continued Swadhin Bangla Betar, "or totally mad to expect such a victorious army [Mukti Bahini] to fall for an 'amnesty' trap by a colonial force that not only massacred their loved ones by the thousand but has looted their property and brutally raped their mothers, wives and sisters."

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini raided Nalitabari police station in Mymensingh district today and damaged the Pakistan military police camp.

In Sylhet district, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistan troops in Dilkhush area and killed 12 of them.

In Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna Sector, Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops with mortars in Bhomra, killing four. In Kakdanda they inflicted six casualties on Pakistani troops.

In Rangpur-Dinajpur Sector, Mukti Bahini demolished two power pylons between Thakurgaon and Pirganj. On the Ranishankoil-Haripur road, one Pakistani vehicle was blown up with a mine laid by Mukti Bahini, killing five of its occupants and causing severe damage to the vehicle. They also ambushed enemy troops approaching the area, killing six and injuring four.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
