Free Bangladesh to join Commonwealth
2021-09-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/free-bangladesh-join-commonwealth-2171021

September 8, 1971

RECOGNITION VERY SOON: KAUL

India had opened a meaningful dialogue with China and the USA, as with many other countries, on the Bangladesh issue. Some significant developments were expected soon after Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's visit to the USA.

Disclosing this in an interview today TN Kaul, Indian external affairs secretary, made it quite clear that in a similar manner India would strongly represent the Bangladesh issue at the forthcoming General Assembly meeting of the UN. India would also plead with the UN Secretary General U Thant to use his good offices to solve the Bangladesh problem, he assured.

Asked when India would extend recognition to the Bangladesh government, Kaul said: "very soon."

'90% OF BANGLADESH TERRITORY IS IN OUR CONTROL'

KM Shehabuddin, head of the Bangladesh mission in New Delhi, said today that Bangladesh as a free country would like to join the Commonwealth because of certain facilities available to its members. He added that was the reason M Hossain Ali had been named the Bangladesh high commissioner to India with headquarters in Calcutta.

The Bangladesh representative told a press club luncheon meeting: "Even Dacca, considered a safer place for Islamabad is no longer that safe for West Pakistan. We have achieved a lot of success in our struggle."

He claimed, "Nine-tenths of Bangladesh territory is in our control …The control of the Pakistan Army is only up to cantonments."

Amjadul Haque, another diplomatic staffer of the Bangladesh mission, warned West Pakistan that any harm done to Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman would constitute a threat to peace as he did not belong to Bangladesh alone, but to the whole world.

He reiterated the four-point proposal as put forward by the Bangladesh prime minister and the acting president as preconditions to a political settlement of the Bangladesh issue. They were: recognition of Bangladesh by West Pakistan, unconditional release of Bangabandhu, withdrawal of the invading army and compensation for all losses suffered by the people at the hands of the Pakistan army.

MOSCOW WARNS PINDI AGAINST WAR

The Soviet Union was reported to have warned Pakistan against any misadventure like going to war against India. This had been intimated to President Yahya Khan's special emissary to Moscow Sultan Mohammad Khan, Pakistan's foreign secretary, who had suddenly cut short his visit and returned to Islamabad today.

The reason for his sudden departure from Moscow for home was said to be linked with his desire to convey the Soviet stand to his government as early as possible.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today raided the Pakistani position at Brittiachara killing eight Pakistani troops and injuring three.

In Dhaka-Comilla-Chittagong sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed three boats carrying Pakistani troops in the Monipur area. In this action, seven Pakistani troops were killed.

In another operation, Bangladeshi freedom fighters ambushed enemy troops travelling in three country boats in Mohanganj area in Mymensingh district. The enemy fled leaving behind three boats and large quantities of arms and ammunitions. The boats and stores were recovered by the Mukti Bahini.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
