Shah of Persia may mediate
2021-09-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/shah-persia-may-mediate-2173891

September 12, 1971

RAPPROCHEMENT ON BANGLADESH

On the occasion of the 2,500th anniversary of the founding of monarchy in Iran, there rose a possibility that the Shah of Persia would try to bring about a rapprochement on Bangladesh between India and Pakistan with blessings from the Nixon administration, the Soviet Union and Britain. Several proposals were in the air.

One of them was that India should persuade the Bangladesh leaders to accept a settlement on the basis of "more than the Awami League's Six-point -- a confederation between Bangladesh and West Pakistan with very limited powers at the centre".

According to another proposal, as India, Britain and some other countries maintained in different degrees that nothing short of complete independence of Bangladesh was acceptable to the people of Bangladesh, the Yahya regime should, therefore, agree to withdraw its occupation force and explore the prospects of a loose federation of West Pakistan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In Mymensingh-Sylhet Sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops at Akhashree killing two and injuring three of the enemy soldiers. In another operation, Mukti Bahini guerrillas encountered Pakistani troops in Abhang. Seven Pakistani troops were killed in heavy exchange of fire.

In Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi Sector, Mukti Bahini exchanged fire with Pakistani troops in Bhotemari and killed 10 Pakistani soldiers. Another group of Mukti Bahini disrupted road communication around Thakurgaon town.

In Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram Sector, Mukti Bahini today fired with mortars on Pakistani position in Fatehpur area and killed one soldier and three Razakars who were assisting them. On the same day a similar attack was made on Pakistani troops near Brahmanbaria. Earlier Mukti Bahini disrupted telecommunication between Brahmanbaria and Nabinagar. Two Pakistani soldiers and two of their collaborators were killed due to a mine explosion planted by Mukti Bahini near Chhagalnaiya today. Mukti Bahini ambushed and sunk two boats carrying Pakistani troops near Mandabagh. At least 15 Pakistani troops drowned. Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in the Guthuma River area killing two soldiers and injuring two. In this sector a large number of Razakars surrendered with their arms to Mukti Bahini.

$100,000 FOR BANGLADESH INTELLECTUALS

The Ford Foundation announced grants totalling $100,000 today to aid temporary placement of Bangladeshi intellectuals. The foundation's statement said that an estimated 140 university faculty members had fled East Pakistan, about 100 of them to India. Most of the others were in Britain and North America. Another 1,000 college teachers had also fled to India.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
