Only self-rule will satisfy Bangladesh: Galbraith
2021-09-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/only-self-rule-will-satisfy-bangladesh-galbraith-2173111

September 11, 1971

MUSHTAQUE TO LEAD DELEGATION TO UN

Bangladesh's Foreign Minister Khandaker Mushtaque Ahmed would present the case of Bangladesh before the UN General Assembly. He would be assisted by a strong team of experts including Bangladesh Foreign Secretary Mahbub Alam and diplomat Abul Fateh. The decision to send a strong delegation to the UN General Assembly had been taken by the Bangladesh government in the light of the recent discussions at political level with different parties in Bangladesh. In fact, the Consultative Committee, formed with five-party representatives had found it necessary to rouse the conscience of the world to the realities in Bangladesh.

GALBRAITH URGES FOR SELF-DETERMINATION

Professor John Kenneth Galbraith, former US Ambassador to India, said today at the Calcutta Press Club that because of the massive influx of evacuees from Bangladesh to India, the Bangladesh issue had ceased to be an internal affair of Pakistan. He also refused to distinguish between political aspects of the issue and the evacuee question. "Two cannot be viewed separately," he opined.

Earlier today Professor Galbraith discussed various aspects of Bangladesh issues with the Bangladesh Foreign Minister Khandaker Mushtaque Ahmed and Bangladesh High Commissioner to India M Hossain Ali. After his visit to the evacuee camp and his talks with Bangladesh leaders Professor Galbraith was convinced that only self-government would satisfy the people of Bangladesh.

US ASKS YAHYA TO FACILITATE EVACUEE'S RETURN

The USA urged the Government of Pakistan to make every effort to create conditions that would lead to the return of Bangladesh refugees to their homes, the US Secretary of State William Rogers told the Congress. Rogers gave this assurance while making a request for the Congress's approval of economic assistance to Pakistan for development purposes "without restrictions".

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini today destroyed the railway bridge between Manikkhali- Sararchar disrupting railway communication. Another group of Mukti Bahini ambushed the Pakistani patrol in Kalikapur killing five enemy troops and injuring 10.

In Kushtia-Jessore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani positions in Sikri, killing five Pakistani troops

RED CROSS RESUMES WORK IN BANGLADESH

The International Red Cross resumed relief work in East Pakistan. An official of the League of Red Cross informed that the Red Cross was now doing relief work not only among those hit by last year's cyclone, but also victims of army atrocities. The Red Cross had suspended its relief operations in East Pakistan at the time of the army crackdown.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
