Khurram Panni defects to Bangladesh
2021-09-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/khurram-panni-defects-bangladesh-2174511

September 13, 1971

MORE DEFECTIONS TO BANGLADESH

The Pakistan Ambassador to the Philippines Khurram Panni today defected to the Bangladesh government. Khurram Panni, 49, was the first diplomat of ambassadorial rank to defect to the Bangladesh cause. He came to Manila as ambassador in March, 1970 and his tenure of duty was not scheduled to end until late in October, 1971.

Panni told a news conference that he would ask the Philippine government for permission to remain in Manila and start his mission. He was moving from the official residence to new quarters.

He said: "I hereby disassociate myself from the present usurper army junta of West Pakistan which claims to be the Government of Pakistan. It is totally illegitimate and absolutely barbarian. It has no mandate of the people -- it has no right to call itself the Government of Pakistan.

"Pakistan, as I knew it, lies buried under a mountain of corpses -- the corpses of innocent men, women and children of Bangladesh. It lies buried under the agony of the eight million refugees whom they have pushed out into India. It lies buried under the mass plunder and rape which the West Pakistani government are perpetrating there every day."

Until Panni's resignation, the highest-ranking Pakistani diplomat to go over to Bangladesh was Mahasin Ali, head of Pakistan's mission to Hong Kong.

With Panni's resignation, the only ambassador of Bangalee origin left in Pakistan's diplomatic service was Kaisar in Peking. He was believed to have fallen from official favour for refusing to work for Peking's endorsement of President Yahya Khan's action in East Pakistan. He had been virtually stripped of his powers and refused permission to visit even Hong Kong.

Another Pakistani diplomat, Mohiuddin Jaigirdar, also quit the Pakistan foreign service today and joined the Bangladesh mission in London. Jaigirdar, 34, had been head of Chancery and sometimes the acting high commissioner at the Pakistani mission in Lagos, Nigeria.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today fired mortars on Pakistani troops near Chhotachra and killed 13 soldiers.

In another operation, Mukti Bahini ambushed the Pakistan column of a gun boat and several launches carrying Pakistani troops in Harinagar in Khulna district. In the firing the gun crew of the escorting gun boat was killed and the radar antenna was destroyed. Later on, four launches of the column were sunk. Mukti Bahini also drowned three launches in Banaripara.

It was estimated that nearly 40 Pakistani troops were drowned in the river. In this sector during the last few days a large number of Razakars surrendered to Mukti Bahini. The latest such desertion took place in Kushtia when the chairman of a union peace committee along with 22 Razakars surrendered with arms to the Mukti Bahini.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini exchanged fire with Pakistani troops in Bhoga, Karimpur and Kamarajil areas and inflicted four casualties on the enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini also ambushed Pakistani troops in Minteshwar area and killed two Pakistani soldiers.

In Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini today fired mortars on Pakistani troops in Lakshmipur, killing four enemy soldiers. They also destroyed two enemy bunkers. Another group of Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Moidhyar Bazar killing three enemy soldiers and one Razakar. On the same day Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Dakshin Jaspur and killed one soldier.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
