Pakistan army using FAO boats for repression
2021-09-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/pakistan-army-using-fao-boats-repression-2176926

September 16, 1971

FAO COMPLAINED AGAINST PAKISTAN

The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) accused Pakistan of diverting boats and vehicles intended for carrying relief materials for military use. In a formal note to the UN Secretary General U Thant, the FAO brought this charge against Pakistan. The UN secretary general in his concern about the matter asked the Pakistani representative in the UN for clarification.

DHAR HOLDS TALKS WITH BANGLADESH MINISTERS

DP Dhar, chairman, foreign policy planning cell of the Indian external affairs ministry, today held a long talk with Bangladesh ministers. The list of delegates to be sent to New York to represent Bangladesh at the United Nations General Assembly session was drawn up. Besides the Bangladesh Foreign Minister Khandaker Mushtaque Ahmed, the names of Mahbub Alam, Muzaffar Ahmed Choudhury and MA Fateh had also been suggested.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today raided Pakistan troops in Khanpur area and killed two enemy soldiers. They destroyed seven enemy bunkers and the building where the Pakistani troops camped. Another Mukti Bahini group ambushed Pakistani troops near Dimapur and killed two soldiers. They also disrupted telecommunications and demolished a road bridge in the same area.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' position in Badirteka killing two enemy soldiers.

In the Kushtia-Jashore- Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops near Gangni bridge and inflicted five casualties on the enemy. Another group of Mukti Bahini fired on enemy  troops at Bhomra and killed 4 Pakistani soldiers.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops in Khajuria area today, killing two soldiers and two Razakars collaborating with the enemy troops. On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided and held the Pakistan position near Hugli village. In a heavy exchange of fire, three Pakistani soldiers were killed and 20 wounded.

PAKISTAN CANCELS PANNI'S PASSPORT

Pakistan Foreign Ministry today asked its diplomatic mission in Manila to confiscate the passports of Khurram Khan Panni, the Pakistan ambassador who had defected to Bangladesh, and his wife.

Pakistan's Chargé d'Affaires in Manilla KK Ghori told newsmen that his government would protest to the Government of Philippines if Panni carried out the plan to open an unofficial mission in Manila to seek support for Bangladesh.

OMEGA TEAM MEMBERS RELEASED

The four-member Omega team was released by the East Pakistan authority. The team which had been arrested earlier this month included two women. They were taken into custody when they crossed into Bangladesh to distribute relief supplies.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
