Nations urged to recognise Bangladesh
2021-09-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nations-urged-recognise-bangladesh-2179631

September 20, 1971

CABINET MEETING ON DEFENCE BUDGET

The Bangladesh cabinet met today and discussed the budget of the Ministry of Defence. The acute shortage of winter clothing and other necessary items for the fighting forces and the youth camp trainees was brought to focus. The cabinet decided that the Defence Secretary would immediately prepare estimates for procurement of winter clothing including blankets, covering the requirements of both the fighting forces and the youth camp trainees.

RESOLUTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE

The international conference on Bangladesh today called upon governments of the world to recognise the Bangladesh government and to stop all military assistance to the West Pakistani regime. It declared in a resolution that the political struggle of the people of Bangladesh should be viewed by the international community as a national struggle for freedom.

It appealed to governments and people across the world to offer immediate and effective assistance to the Bangladesh government. Such assistance, the resolution said, might mean military aid to some nations and individuals, to others this might imply economic and non-violent aid.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed a Pakistani patrol north of Thakurgaon, killing six of the enemy and injuring four. On the same day, grenades were thrown at the Thakurgaon powerhouse causing extensive damage. Another group of Mukti Bahini damaged a railway bridge and removed railway tracks, paralysing railway communication around Lalmonirhat junction.

In another operation, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops at Jagdalhat and Panchagarh area on the night of19th September. In that action 11 enemy soldiers were killed, 19 injured and two weapons including 750 rounds of bullets were captured.

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Harichandrapur and killed two.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini today raided the Pakistani position in Kalighat Tea Garden area and killed five Pakistani troops. Another group of Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops near Gauripur and inflicted five casualties on them.

SENATOR KENNEDY URGED FOR RELIEF SUPPORT

Senator Edward Kennedy today introduced a bill to authorise $400 million to assist the International Refugee Relief Effort in India. He said, "New estimates of our Government now put the cost to India, of caring for the refugee, at the staggering total of $830,000,000 during the current fiscal year -- a cost equal to the annual contribution of the aid consortium for India's economic development. Simple humanity demands that we and the international community must face the simple truth that this refugee burden cannot be borne by India alone."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
