Bangladesh’s UN delegation announced
2021-09-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladeshs-un-delegation-announced-2180351

September 21, 1971

BANGLADESH DELEGATION TO UN

The Government of People's Republic of Bangladesh announced today the composition and names of the members of the Bangladesh delegation to the United Nations General Assembly. The delegation, according to the press release, would be led by the country's Permanent Representative to the UN Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury. Justice Chowdhury who was also the Bangladesh Permanent Representative in the UK had already proceeded to New York from London.

The following members of the delegation would proceed from Mujibnagar to Delhi today en route to New York: MA Samad, MNA, political adviser to the Government of Bangladesh; Prof Muzaffar Ahmed, member of the consultative committee to the Government of Bangladesh; Phani Bhusan Mazumdar, MPA;  Serajul Haque, MPA; Advocate Syed Abdus Sultan, MNA; Fakir Shahabuddin, MPA; Mafiz Chowdhury, MNA; Ashabul Haque, MPA; AFM Abul Fateh, ambassador-at-large; KK Panni, roving ambassador to Far-East and South-East Asia; and Dr AR Mallik, vice-chancellor of the Chittagong University.

MR Siddiqui, MNA and Bangladesh representative in the USA; Rehman Sobhan, an economist and ambassador extraordinary for economic affairs; SA Karim, Bangladesh deputy permanent representative in the UN; and AMA Muhith, counselor, Bangladesh mission in the USA were already in New York and would join the delegation there.

DATES OF EAST PAKISTAN BY-ELECTIONS REVISED

The chief election Commissioner of the Pakistan Election Commission announced today a revised timeline for the by-elections to the vacant seats in the National Assembly and the Provincial Assembly from East Pakistan.

According to the revised schedule, nomination papers for election to the National Assembly and the Provincial Assembly of East Pakistan would be received by the returning officers concerned on October 20 and October 21, 1971, respectively. The last date for withdrawal of candidature would be October 28, 1971, in the case of both assemblies. Polls would be held for election to the two assemblies simultaneously, commencing from December 12, 1971, and would be completed by December 23, 1971.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani position in Patharghatha, killing five enemy soldiers and injuring three. On the same day, Mukti Bahini encountered Pakistani troops and irregulars in Chaukiapara and killed three troops. In an ambush on the Pakistani troops in the same area, Mukti Bahini killed two soldiers and injured two others. Another group of Mukti Bahini raided Saidullapur Police Station in Rangpur district and recovered 12 shotguns. Several police officers were wounded during the action.

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini encountered Pakistani troops in Barabari area and killed five. In the same area, they engaged another column of Pakistani troops and exchanged fire. In this action five Pakistani troops and three collaborators were killed.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops and Razakars in Gazipur Tea Garden area, killing five soldiers and eight Razakars. They also recovered five rifles. On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops and Razakars in Samanbagh Tea garden and nearby areas, killing seven Pakistani soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
