India calls for political settlement
2021-09-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/india-calls-political-settlement-2184886

September 27, 1971

TAJUDDIN'S MEETING WITH SECRETARIES

Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad today held meeting with secretaries of different ministries of the exiled government. The finance secretary reported on his recent visit to Delhi in connection with formalisation of trade and commerce with India.

Various problems of the zonal administrative councils, particularly the question of strengthening the zonal administration through decentralisation of the Government's functionaries were discussed. The prime minister desired that the secretaries' committee should further deliberate on this issue and come up with specific suggestions to make the zonal administrative councils more effective and efficient.

The prime minister advised the agriculture secretary to help the Planning Commission in matters connected with agriculture. It was desired that the agriculture secretary should devote his attention to problems of the country's agricultural economy, particularly those having a definite bearing on the future development of the country, such as land ownership and land tenure system, co-operatives, introduction of modem techniques of farming, irrigation, etc.

SWARAN SINGH'S SPEECH AT UN

India's Minister for External Affairs Swaran Singh today called upon the UN and all other international organs "to impress on the military regime of Islamabad that force will not succeed and therefore a political settlement between the military regime and the already elected members is essential". He was speaking in the general debate which opened in the UN General Assembly.

However, the Bangladesh foreign ministry was critical of this Indian stance, and, referring to Swaran Singh's speech at the UN, regretted in an internal report on the international situation that "the powers which were sympathetic to us and were considered to be trusted friends have also now turned against the concept of an independent Bangladesh".

INDIRA FLIES TO MOSCOW

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi flew into a rousing reception in Moscow today on a three-day visit. Her talks with Soviet leaders would start tomorrow. According to a spokesperson, the subject to be discussed at the prime ministers' talks would include follow-up action to the Indo-Soviet Treaty, economic cooperation, expansion of cooperation in other fields as well as Bangladesh issues.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today ambushed the Pakistani patrol in Joymonirhat of Dinajpur district. They killed six Pakistani soldiers there. In a surprise raid Mukti Bahini forced Pakistani troops to abandon their position in Usalja. Seventeen Pakistani soldiers were killed in the action. Mukti Bahini captured some arms and ammunition. In another operation, Mukti Bahini ambushed a mixed patrol of Pakistani soldiers and razakars near Khanpur and inflicted 15 casualties on the enemy. On the same day Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops position near Chakramari and killed seven enemy soldiers. Mukti Bahini disrupted railway communication between Parvatipur and Badarganj by blowing up a railway bridge.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini today ambushed a Pakistani patrol near Gafargaon in Mymensingh district and killed two Pakistani soldiers. On the night of September 27, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops guarding the bridge near Rahimpur, killing one enemy soldier. In another operation, Mukti Bahini attacked Pakistani troops near Baotali and killed three Pakistani soldiers.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini raided the Pakistani position at Kaimpur, killing eight enemy soldiers and injuring seven. Two enemy boats were destroyed in the area. On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani positions at Sripur and Ajnapur areas and killed 11 Pakistani soldiers. In another operation, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Monoharpur and Koteswar, killing four of the enemy.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
