Kosygin calls for political settlement
2021-09-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/kosygin-calls-political-settlement-2185481

September 28, 1971

INDIRA'S MEETING WITH SOVIET LEADERS

Talks between Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and Soviet leaders began today. The Indian side gave a detailed analysis of the situation in East Pakistan and expressed concern at the failure of the world opinion to urge Pakistan to create conditions conducive to the dignified return of refugees. It was pointed out that Pakistan trying to intensify atrocities in East Pakistan would inevitably have repercussions on India.  The Soviet leaders were also informed that the Bangladesh crisis might escalate after the monsoon, and only an immediate political solution would meet the needs of the situation.

Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin stressed the need for a political settlement in East Pakistan which would take into account the legitimate interests of its population, and called upon Pakistan President Yahya Khan to undertake the most effective steps for the liquidation of this hotbed of tension.

WARNING AGAINST CONTEMPT OF COURT

In a press note issued today by the chief martial law administrator of Pakistan, people were asked to refrain from saying or doing anything which might constitute a contempt of court as to the trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

The press note disclosed that the trial of Bangabandhu was in progress and, so far, the prosecution had examined 20 witnesses in support of the charges brought against him.

It may be mentioned here that a special military court was convened by the chief martial law administrator of Pakistan to try Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on camera for "waging war against Pakistan and for other charges".

The trial commenced on August 11, 1971. The court, however, adjourned on the same day. On September 8, 1971 the services of AK Brohi was procured as the defence counsel, and the examination of the prosecution witnesses started.

FOUR PAKISTANI HC EMPLOYEES DEFECT

Four more employees of the Pakistan high commission in New Delhi switched their allegiance to Bangladesh along with their families. The four members of the staff are Mufizur Rahman, stenographer, AK Azad, upper division assistant, Mohammad Zainul Abedin, lower assistant, and Ghulam Mustafa, dispenser.

Mufizur Rahman told a news conference at the Bangladesh mission that a large crowd of people had helped them get down from a bus after they had told them that they were being taken to Pakistan forcibly. The people arranged for another bus from the border which brought them to the Bangladesh mission.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini encountered Pakistani troops in Likhalderi area today. They killed six enemy soldiers and injured three.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini today raided the Gafargaon Police Station and killed two police personnel. On the same day, Mukti Bahini ambushed the Pakistani Patrol at Dewanganj, killing two Pakistani soldiers.

Mukti Bahini ambushed enemy troops today in Barmi and Joydevpur area in Dhaka district, killing 12 enemy soldiers and injuring seven.

Mukti Bahini attacked the Pakistani position today with mortars in Kayumpur near Kosba of Cumilla district. The battle continued for three hours. Mukti Bahini killed 35 enemy soldiers and injured 15. Besides, they captured five bayonets and 250 rounds of Chinese bullets.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
