Russia, India call for urgent political solution
2021-09-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/russia-india-call-urgent-political-solution-2186246

September 29, 1971

PAKISTAN HIGH COMMISSION'S PROTEST AGAINST DEFECTIONS

The Pakistan high commission in New Delhi today lodged a "vehement protest" to India in connection with the escape of four Bangalee members of its staff with their families while being taken by road to West Pakistan.

In a note to the external affairs minister, the Pakistan high commission said there had been a breach of the immunity of the high commission personnel. It also accused Indian authorities of collusion with "traitorous elements" -- an apparent reference to the Pakistani diplomats who had defected earlier to set up a Bangladesh mission.

KM Shehabuddin, chief of the Bangladesh mission in New Delhi, today described as "preposterous and mischievous" the charge made by the Pakistan high commission that four Bangalee employees had been kidnapped. He told a press conference that the employees who had escaped dramatically last night had come out on their own to join millions of their Bangalee brethren to serve the cause of Bangladesh, and that the Government of India was not involved in any way.

INDO-SOVIET JOINT STATEMENT

India and the Soviet Union today called for an urgent political solution to the problems created by the developments in East Pakistan, in keeping with the "wishes, the inalienable rights and lawful interests of its people".

A joint statement issued in Moscow today also made it clear that such a solution should ensure the speediest return of millions of refugees now in India to their homeland.

PEACE IS IN PERIL

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi today said it was the world's responsibility to create without further delay conditions to enable the Bangladesh refugees to return to their homes in safety and dignity.  "Unfortunately, there is no sign that this is being attempted," she regretted.

The Indian premier was addressing a student gathering at the Moscow University.

She further said, "When millions of people are pushed into another's territory, jeopardising its normal life … it is obvious that peace is in peril. We have shown the greatest forbearance, but it is essential that the basic cause of the crisis be immediately removed by a political solution acceptable to the people concerned."

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushta-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini fired on a Pakistani patrol east of Bhomra killing two Pakistani troops and injuring three.

Mukti Bahini today raided Pakistani troops in Noapur of Noakhali district killing six enemy soldiers and injuring 15 of them. On the same day, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Koteswar area and killed three enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Anandapur of Cumilla district, killing four. In another operation Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Monoharpur area in the same district and killed four enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' position near Purbo Chagalnaiya of Noakhali district. They killed five enemy soldiers and wounded seven others, and they also destroyed three bunkers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided a mixed column of Pakistani troops and Razakars guarding a road bridge on Kulaura-Barlekha road killing three and wounding one.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
