Podgorny for equitable solution of Bangladesh issue
2021-10-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/podgorny-equitable-solution-bangladesh-issue-2187981

October 1, 1971

PODGORNY OFFERS ALL POSSIBLE ASSISTANCE

Speaking at a banquet hosted in his honour by Indian President VV Giri in Rashtrapati Bhaban in New Delhi, Soviet President Nikolai Podgorny today offered all possible assistance "to an equitable political settlement" of Bangladesh "in the spirit of existing friendly relation with India". He made it clear that the settlement must be based on legitimate rights and interest of the people in Bangladesh.

CHOWDHURY STRESSES 3 CONDITIONS OF SETTLEMENT

Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, leader of the 16-member Bangladesh delegation to the UN, said today in New York that any political solution which did not envisage the recognition of Bangladesh as an independent country, the immediate and unconditional release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and withdrawal of occupation forces would not be acceptable to the people of Bangladesh.

Addressing a well-attended press conference at the UN, Justice Chowdhury said President Yahya Khan was trying to divert the attention of the world by saying that he was prepared to discuss the refugee problem with India. "We want to make it clear with full sense of responsibility that no country, India or any other, has any right to speak for Bangladesh," he added.

ASGHAR KHAN WANTS CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT

Former air chief of Pakistan, Air Marshal Asghar Khan demanded restoration of civilian government in the four provinces of West Pakistan. Addressing a news conference in Dhaka today, Asghar Khan said if the recent general amnesty offer by President Yahya Khan was applied to all Awami League members of the still-born National Assembly and Provincial Assembly, there would be no need to hold by-elections. He accused the peace committees in East Pakistan of harassing the villagers. He said the committees were making the life of the villagers difficult.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Two Pakistani soldiers were killed today when a mine laid by Mukti Bahini in Birisiri-Bijoypur area exploded, while another party of Mukti Bahini engaged Pakistani troops with mortars near Bandarkata, killing five Pakistani soldiers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini blew up one Pakistani truck on Phulpur-Haluaghat road of Mymensingh district.

In a joint raid on Pakistani troops near Puttiachara, Sreemangal, Mukti Bahini today killed three enemy soldiers and wounded one.

Mukti Bahini also demolished the railway track between Dhaka and Mymensingh.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today raided Pakistani troops' position near Nayadighi area. They killed one enemy soldier and wounded two.

Mukti Bahini raided Pakistan army position near Balla. They also attacked the enemy reinforcement moving from Ashrampara to Balla. In that action, 25 enemy soldiers were killed and eight wounded.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
