Bangladesh cabinet discusses Indo-Soviet talk
2021-10-02T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-cabinet-discusses-indo-soviet-talk-2188696

October 2, 1971

CABINET MEETING HELD

The Bangladesh cabinet met today to review the Kremlin meeting between the Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and the Soviet leaders, and to assess its implication on the War of Liberation. Earlier, Bangladesh Foreign Secretary Mahbub Alam had a meeting with Indian Foreign Secretary TN Kaul, who had accompanied Indira to Moscow. Although no official comment on the cabinet talks was available, informed sources indicated that the cabinet was satisfied with the outcome of the Moscow talks and in particular with the growing realisation among the Soviet leaders of the extent and intensity of the Liberation War in Bangladesh.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops, killing three and injuring four of them. Earlier they carried out several raids in the same area destroying important roads and culverts. On the same day, a bullock cart carrying rations for Pakistani troops was blown up when a mine laid by Mukti Bahini exploded in Thakurgaon area. Freedom fighters killed two of its occupants in this operation.

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, freedom fighters today ambushed a Pakistani column near Madra. Six enemy soldiers were killed in the operation.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini today raided the Pakistan position at Rayiapur area inflicting four casualties on them. Another group of Mukti Bahini ambushed a Pakistani patrol near Jallikhala area killing seven and injuring 12 others.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chittagong sector, Mukti Bahini raided the Pakistan position area Champaknagar and killed two enemy soldiers. In another raid in this area freedom fighters killed five Pakistani soldiers.

CHINA WILL STAND BY PAKISTAN: CHINESE DIPLOMAT

Chang Ying, Chinese consul general to East Pakistan, said his country would stand by Pakistan in case of any outside aggression. He was addressing a reception marking the Peking regime's 22nd anniversary in Dhaka today.

'PAKISTAN FACING GRAVE CRISIS'

Pakistan told its people that the country was facing a grave crisis of internal subversion and external aggression. The Islamabad government called upon the people and the press to guard against 'speculation and rumours about important national affairs'.

YAHYA URGED TO RELEASE BANGABANDHU

President of the Indian Union Mulsim League Muhammad Ismail urged Pakistan President Yahya Khan to straight away order the release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
