Election schedule declared
2021-10-03T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/election-schedule-declared-2189341

October 3, 1971

ANOTHER DEFECTION TO BANGLADESH

The First Secretary of the Pakistani Embassy in Katmandu, Mustafizur Rahman, switched his allegiance to the Bangladesh Government on October 3. Mustafizur Rahman, a 29-year-old Bangalee, who was also head of the chancery, told a news conference at his residence that he had taken this "bold" decision after six months of "the worst mental agony in my life."

He said he had communicated his decision to the Nepalese Prime Minister, KN Bisht, from whom he sought permission to stay on in Nepal as the special envoy of the Bangladesh government till it was liberated, he had also sought the Nepalese government's protection for himself and his family-wife and two children- "from physical, mental or material harm" that may be caused by West Pakistanis living in Nepal.

BY-ELECTIONS SCHEDULE ANNOUNCED

The Pakistan Election Commission today declared polls schedule for by-elections for the 88 seats in the Provincial Assembly of East Pakistan which had been rendered vacant on account of the disqualifications (including one death). The elections were scheduled to be held between December 18, 1971, and January 7, 1972.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Since the beginning of October, raids and ambushes by Mukti Bahini increased in intensity, frequency and ferocity which made enemy forces more nervous.

In the early morning of October 3, an ambush was laid in Amjadhat area in Belonia. A small enemy party was moving to the company headquarters, probably for food. The party was ambushed at 5:00 in the morning. Two of them were seriously injured and carried away by the rest of the party. It was learnt that the two injured soldiers had died later.

Another ambush was laid near Karalia Tila in Karerhat on that night. Two Pakistani soldiers and three razakars were killed while they were on patrol duty. Mukti Bahini forces returned to their base safely.

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today ambushed Pakistani troops near Gaveshpur in which they killed five enemy soldiers and wounded four others. On the same day seven Pakistani collaborators surrendered to Mukti Bahini with mines and rifles in Chandpur area of Jashore district.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet Sector, one Pakistan army vehicle was blown up due to explosion of a mine laid by Mukti Bahini on Kamalpur- Bakshiganj Road of Jamalpur. They killed seven and wounded six others of enemy forces. On the same day another column of Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani positions in Dhanbari area of Tangail district. Freedom fighters wounded a large number of occupying soldiers there.

THANT URGED TO SEND COMMISSION

The Natun Bangla, weekly organ of the National Awami Party (Muzaffar), urged the UN Secretary General U Thant to send an international commission to Bangladesh to probe the Pakistan Army brutalities before which even the "ghost of Hitler will be ashamed."

LABOUR PARTY CONCERNED AT BLOODSHED

British opposition Labour Party expressed "horror and concern" at the present bloodshed in Bangladesh. In a statement it said a political solution could be reached there only after military repression had ceased and Bangladesh political leaders including Sheikh Mujib released from detention.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
