‘Halt US aid to Pakistan’
2021-10-05T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/halt-us-aid-pakistan-2190776

October 5, 1971

US SENATE BODY VOTES TO STOP AID TO PAKISTAN

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved a proposal to suspend US aid to Pakistan. The provision, already voted by the House of Representatives, laid down that all US economic, military and other aid, including sale of military equipment and agricultural commodities, be stopped until Pakistan cooperates in stabilising the situation in East Pakistan and permits return of refugees from India. Aid would be resumed when President Richard Nixon certified to the Congress that those actions had taken place.

INDIA WILL NOT ACCEPT MOVE FOR BILATERAL TALKS

India will not accept any proposal for bilateral negotiations on Bangladesh on the ground that the problem was entirely of Pakistan's own making. India's Permanent Representative at the UN Samar Sen made this clear today in a rejoinder at the General Assembly to counter certain allegations earlier made by the leader of the Pakistan delegation, Mahmud Ali.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today raided the Pakistani position near Pirgacha (Khulna) and killed three Pakistani soldiers including a JCO.

Pakistani troops today burnt several villages in Bhatiapara under Kashiani PS of Gopalgonj in reprisal of a humiliating defeat the previous day. On that day, Mukti Bahini made a daring attack from three sides on Pakistani troops' position.

At least 30 Pakistani soldiers and 20 razakars were killed in the action. A group of razakars surrendered to Mukti Bahini with their arms. In desperation, the Pakistani soldiers sent for air cover. Pakistani jets carried out intensive air strafing in the area twice during the day. A Pakistani helicopter carrying fresh troops tried to land around sunset but due to Mukti Bahini's firing the helicopter left for Dhaka.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini fired on enemy troops near Khanjanpur killing 12 occupation soldiers. During October 4 and 5, 10 Pakistani soldiers were killed due to explosions of mines planted by freedom fighters along Bhurungamari road.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Khajuria and killed four. In a number of ambushes during October 4 and 5 near Guthuma, five Pakistani troops were killed. During the period, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Ajnapur twice, during which 13 Pakistani soldiers were killed and three wounded.

On October 5, Mukti Bahini fired on Pakistani soldiers near Nayanpur and inflicted five casualties on the enemy. On the same day, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Jambari and killed two enemies.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
