Freedom first: Tajuddin
2021-10-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/freedom-first-tajuddin-2191621

October 6, 1971

TAJUDDIN'S INTERVIEW

Tajuddin Ahmad, prime minister of People's Republic of Bangladesh, today said the Bangladesh issue would be resolved only by complete victory of freedom fighters on the country's battlefields.

In an exclusive interview with Swadhin Bangla Betar the Bangladesh prime minister said, "There cannot be any negotiation with anyone before our four-point demand is conceded by the Pakistani rulers. These conditions are recognition of the sovereignty and independence of Bangladesh, unconditional release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, withdrawal of all Pakistan troops from the country, and adequate compensation for the damage and destruction caused by the Pakistani army."

He further said, "If narrow national interest and the question of world strategy prevent any country from extending its cooperation and support to us, then it should remain neutral on the issue. For, to oppose a national liberation movement directly or indirectly is to stand against the concept of independence and other human values."

Commenting on the success of the freedom fighters during the last six months, Tajuddin Ahmad said, "What the Mukti Bahini has achieved during these few months will remain imperishable in the pages of history as an example of unprecedented courage and valour."

NIXON URGES FOR ADDITIONAL FUND

US President Richard Nixon today requested the Congress to authorise and appropriate an additional sum of $50 million for the relief and rehabilitation of refugees from East Pakistan and for humanitarian relief in East Pakistan under the Foreign Assistance Act.

"Together with food supplied under Public Law 480, these funds will enable us to do our share in mitigating the effects of this human crisis, and thus help avert the deeper tragedies that all too easily could follow," said Nixon.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today attacked Madunaghat electric sub-station, a few miles away from Chittagong city, and destroyed two transformers in a daring raid in the early hours of the day. Sepoy Mannan fired the critical shells that destroyed the transformers but in the process of firing was hit by a bullet. He later succumbed to the injury.

There was another action against the Pakistanis at Chagalnaya BOP. Mukti Bahini crept close to the enemy defence at night and laid in wait. A group of Pakistanis had started preparing their bunkers carelessly. At that time the raiding party swung into action and killed three Pakistanis. Mukti Bahini suffered one casualty.

In the Rangpur-Dinjapur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini raided the Pakistani position near Dhanigala and killed four soldiers.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops position near Kamarsail and killed four enemy troops.

Mukti Bahini raided Kaiara School, Feni where the occupation troops camped, and killed six of them.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
