‘Death and suffering on a megaton scale’
2021-10-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/death-and-suffering-megaton-scale-2192531

October 7, 1971

CABINET MEETING HELD

The Bangladesh Cabinet today approved a scheme for the medical care and welfare of the injured Mukti Bahini members as well as the dependents of the martyrs.

The cabinet also requested all sector commanders to submit a detailed report of their existing medical facilities established by the Bangladesh government and provided by the Indian Military Medical Department so far.

It was further decided to open a new head of account under the title Health (Defence Medical Service) Account. An amount of 10 lakh rupees was sanctioned under this head of account. The fund would be placed at the disposal of the prime minister. This sanction would be utilised only in urgent and pressing cases. To cover the requirements on the civil side it was decided to open another new head of account under the title Health (Civil Medical Service) Account. An amount 5.5 lakh rupees was sanctioned under this account and placed at the disposal of the prime minister.

LABOUR PARTY CONDEMNS PAKISTAN GOVT

The annual Labour party conference, in an unanimously carried statement, today condemned the Government of Pakistan for its unjustified use of military force against the people and democratically elected leaders of East Pakistan.

Judith Hart, British MP and former minister for overseas aid in the Labour government, urged the British government to exert pressure on Pakistan. She added, "I believe the moment has now come when outright expression of world opinion is an urgent necessity.

"This is death and suffering on a megaton scale, the kind of thing we used to discuss when we talked about nuclear war," she added.

Justice Abu Sayeed Choudhury, special representative of the Bangladesh government, was invited at the meeting. He made a fervent appeal to recognise Bangladesh, secure release of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and put pressure on Yahya Khan to withdraw West Pakistani army from the soil of Bangladesh.

RASHED SUHRAWARDY EXPRESSES

FULL SUPPORT TO BANGLADESH

Rashed Suhrawardy, son of Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy, in a statement issued today in London expressed his full support to the liberation movement of the people of Bangladesh and hoped that the brave freedom fighters would succeed in their struggle for full independence from the invading army of West Pakistan.

"Not being in politics, I did not think a statement from me personally was necessary but since it has become apparent that the image and memory of my beloved father, Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy, are being sought to be furnished by one member of my immediate family by her recent statements, I felt it incumbent upon me to speak out," he shared.

ON THE WAR FRONT

A bridge on the Chagalnaya-Belonia road was demolished by the guerillas. This was done to isolate the Pakistanis in the Belonia area. The guerillas managed to complete their task under heavy firing.

On the same day, another group of guerillas attacked and destroyed a Tehsil office at Radhanagar and raided Pakistani defences at Mokamia. In the raid in Mokamia, two Pakistanis were killed.

In another operation, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops' patrol in Gabtola area of Noakhali district, killing four enemy soldiers.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, Pakistani soldiers and two razakars collaborating with them were killed when Mukti Bahini raided a column of enemy troops near Markuli, Sylhet today.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
