Nothing short of complete independence: Nazrul Islam
2021-10-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nothing-short-complete-independence-nazrul-islam-2193901

October 9, 1971

NAZRUL ISLAM REITERATES STAND

Syed Nazrul Islam, acting president of Bangladesh, reiterated that nothing short of complete independence would settle the Bangladesh issue. He said that there could not be any compromise with the West Pakistani marauders against whom the 75 million people of Bangladesh had launched their struggle and they would be wiped out from the sacred soil of Bangladesh.

Syed Nazrul was addressing a passing out parade of the Mukti Bahini officers. Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad was also present at the programme.

NO POWER WILL BE ALLOWED TO DICTATE INDIA: INDIRA

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi today emphatically said no foreign power would be allowed to dictate to India what "we should do to deal with the Bangladesh issue". She also made it clear that the Indo-Soviet treaty had in no way fettered India's freedom of action in respect of the Bangladesh developments.

The Bangladesh problem, the Indian prime minister said, had given rise to serious political and economic problems and affected the security of the eastern region. She warned that India was facing a grave situation on its borders and whatever steps the government might take in dealing with the Bangladesh issue, the people might have to face economic and other difficulties. She stressed the need to build up the necessary strength to overcome these difficulties.

NEW PAKISTAN ORDER TO REGULATE POLITICAL ACTIVITIES

Pakistan President Yahya Khan issued a martial law order tonight regulating political activities in Pakistan. The order forbade a range of political activities, from propagating any opinion prejudicial to the integrity of Pakistan to carrying weapons at political rallies.

Military officials, however, said the move amounted to "de facto" removal of the March 26 ban on politics issued after the arrest of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The order also cancelled a martial law regulation issued on March 26 prohibiting political procession.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet sector, a party of Mukti Bahini guerrillas ambushed a Pakistani patrol near Kalshindur killing today, two soldiers.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, the occupation army attacked Sona Mosque area, but it faced retaliated from Mukti Babini. In this action seven Pakistani soldiers were killed and many were wounded. During this action one razakar surrendered to the Mukti Bahini. On the same day Mukti Bahini ambushed an enemy patrol on the road between Joymonirhat and Anderijhar Khamar, killing three and injuring 10 enemy soldiers. They demolished Chandijan bridge on the road between Chalma and Kurigram.

Two enemy soldiers were killed in Kajaldighi area due to a mine explosion. Mukti Bahini also demolished a culvert in Bhelarpur on the road between Churlai and Keta.

There was a raid on Pakistani defences near Guthuma BOP in Feni. One Pakistani soldier was injured and a militiaman killed.

Mukti Bahini today demolished two railway bridges between Zorarganj and Feni disrupting railway communication between these two places.

Another group of Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops guarding Bala bridge in Sylhet district and killed two enemy soldiers. In another encounter with the occupation troops in Tookocha area, Mukti Bahini inflicted heavy casualties on enemy soldiers. Two razakars surrendered to the freedom fighters on the same day in Dakshinkui.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Sadekpur in Comilla district, killing 23 Pakistani soldiers including a captain. The freedom fighters captured six enemy rifles and some ammunition. One Pakistani soldier was also captured in this action.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
