New US aid for Pakistan
2021-10-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/new-us-aid-pakistan-2193261

October 8, 1971

US AID FOR RELIEF IN EAST PAKISTAN

Pakistan and the US today signed an agreement in Islamabad under which the US would provide an additional 50 million rupees for relief work in East Pakistan. The aid allocated from surplus US funds in Pakistan was a new American response to an appeal from the UN Secretary General U Thant for international relief in the province.

ON THE WAR FRONT

A Pakistani patrol was ambushed today. Three Pakistanis were killed and one was injured in the operation. The guerillas returned to base without suffering any losses.

A raiding party laid in wait near Pakistani defence at Guthuma in the evening. That was the usual time for Pakistanis to fall in for evening roll-call. As soon as the roll-call was over and the Pakistanis were about to disperse, the raiding party opened up with LMG and mortar fire. Ten Pakistani soldiers were killed in the raid. The guerillas disappeared in the darkness of the night and returned to base safely.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini encountered a party of Pakistani troops and razakars and killed four troops and two razakars near Meherpur. The same night, Mukti Bahini ambushed a Pakistani vehicle near Baltia, killing one soldier and destroying the vehicle.

In the Dhaka-Comilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed enemy troops' patrol in Latomura of Comilla district, killing three enemy soldiers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided the occupation army position in Mojumderhat area, killing six enemy soldiers. In an ambush on the same day in Charnal area, Mukti Bahini killed two enemy soldiers.

BHUTTO ACCUSES YAHYA OF TRYING TO SPLIT HIS PARTY

Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan Peoples' Party, today accused President Yahya Khan of lavishly spending government funds to create a rift in his party. Addressing party workers in Multan, Bhutto said in a recent meeting with the president he had produced proof in support of his accusation.

Bhutto also criticised the government for bypassing the PPP in taking major decisions. Bhutto pointed out that following the banning of the Awami League his was the largest parliamentary party. Yet it was not consulted in installing a civilian administration in East Pakistan.

3 MINISTERS SWORN IN

In Dhaka, three ministers were sworn in today raising the strength of the three-week-old puppet civilian regime in East Pakistan. Radio Pakistan named the new ministers as Mujibur Rahman, AK Musharrar Hussain and Jamiruddin Ahmed.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
