Pope’s appeal for Bangladesh refugees
2021-10-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/popes-appeal-bangladesh-refugees-2194681

October 10, 1971

BANGLADESH LEADERS CONFIDENT OF EARLY FREEDOM

The roving ambassador of Bangladesh, Abdus Samad Azad, addressed a meeting in London today expressed his confidence in early liberation of Bangladesh. He stressed the unity achieved by all sections of the Bangladesh people.

Professor Muzaffar Ahmed, chief of NAP (Muzaffar), who arrived in London along with Abdus Samad, said the majority of the nations at the UN was in full sympathy with the aspirations of Bangladesh. He also visited Washington, and it was his belief that there was no chance of Pakistan getting an extension of the debt service moratorium by October 31, 1971 nor a further loan from the World Bank or the Aid Pakistan Consortium.

'HELPING EAST BENGAL MEANS CONTRIBUTING TO GENUINE PEACE'

Pope Paul VI today voiced his satisfaction over the huge response to his appeal to help Bangladesh. He thanked them for heeding to his appeal to make today a day of prayer and fasting for the millions of suffering and dying Bangladesh refugees.

He declared, "To help East Bengal means to contribute to genuine peace."

There is possibly no parallel in world history to the distress in East Bengal, the Pope added.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today raided occupation army position in Bhotemari and killed 10 enemy soldiers.

In the Jashore-Khulna-Kushtia sector, Mukti Bahini killed 7 occupation soldiers in Ghugri while they ambushed enemy troops patrol. In this action, one of the freedom fighters was wounded. On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided occupation army position at Madankati School of Khulna district killing four and injuring seven enemy soldiers.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet-Moulvibazar sector, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' position in Kulaura killing five enemy soldiers. During this action, two Razakars surrendered to the freedom fighters with their rifles. On the same day, one enemy bus was blown up due to mine explosion in Pagla area killing one enemy soldier. Mukti Bahini also raided and destroyed a launch between Joykalas and Derai on the same day. In another operation, Mukti Bahini raided occupation Army position in Chargram and killed two enemy soldiers.

UNICEF TO SEND BLANKETS FOR EVACUEES

The Unicef was planning to send about three million blankets for Bangladesh refugees, informed Henry Labouisse, executive director of the Unicef. He added that it was distressing to see many children suffering from malnutrition. Something must be done to provide them with proper food, he urged.

Labouisse further informed that the Unicef had already sent protein food for the children, hospital equipment and medical supplies in addition to shelter materials and other goods. About $22 million were given to the Unicef to undertake "one of the biggest operations" for the refugees.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
