Yahya accepts US proposal for mutual withdrawal
2021-10-11T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahya-accepts-us-proposal-mutual-withdrawal-2195611

October 11, 1971

DISCUSSION WITH YAHYA

The American consulate general in Karachi in a telegram sent to the US state department today informed that Pakistan President Yahya Khan accepted the US proposal for mutual withdrawal of troops and armour by both the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan to some distance from their respective borders.

Yahya reaffirmed his assurance that Pakistan would not be first to initiate hostilities and he suggested that Indian and Pakistani army chiefs of staff meet to work out the arrangements for withdrawal, added the consulate general. The consul general called on the Pakistan president today at the President's House in Karachi.

President Yahya Khan, according to the telegram, agreed that a political solution in East Pakistan was essential and reviewed his timetable for issuing a constitution and convening National Assembly before the end of the year, with provincial assemblies to meet shortly thereafter. The new national government should have an East Pakistan majority, Yahya opined.

Yahya urged the consulate general to take the "strongest" position with the Government of India that it should restrict cross-border operations by Mukti Bahini.

As to the trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Yahya noted that Bangabandhu's trial was still going on. If he is convicted, the court would sentence him to punishment which would conceivably be death. The matter would then come before Yahya who had presidential power to modify the courtʼs judgement. Yahya did not intend to permit any death sentence to be carried out. With early formation of civilian government, that government (which would presumably have East Pakistan majority) would then have the task of dealing with Bangabandhu's future, reported the consulate general.

PPP DELEGATION IN DHAKA

A delegation of the Pakistan People's Party today arrived in Dhaka to assess the prospects of the party's chances in the upcoming by-elections in the province. The party Vice-president Mahmud Ali Kasuri, who was heading the delegation, told newsmen in Dhaka that people of both East and West Pakistan should "cooperate in solving their economic and political problems".

It was reported that a leading PPP official, Meraj Muhammad Khan, dropped out of the delegation hours before it left for East Pakistan, alleging that power in the eastern wing had been handed to "reactionary and anti-people parties" who had massacred political opponents.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet-Moulvibazar sector, Mukti Bahini today raided Debalchara area. In this operation, they killed two enemy soldiers. They also ambushed enemy troops in Muriachara and inflicted three casualties on them. In another ambush in the same area on occupying troops freedom fighters killed three Pakistani soldiers.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini encountered the occupation troops at Hatibanda and killed five enemy soldiers. During this action three of the valiant freedom fighters received minor injuries.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
