Monem Khan shot dead
2021-10-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/monem-khan-shot-dead-2196931

October 13, 1971

BANGLADESH GOVT'S RESPONSE TO YAHYA'S BROADCAST

While commenting on Pakistan President Yahya Khan's broadcast of October 12, 1971, a spokesman of the Government of Bangladesh stated today that the broadcast was another exposition of his own desperate situation in West Pakistan. The speech appeared to be an attempt at creating war psychosis in West Pakistan to rally the people there behind the regime.

Referring to Yahya's speech on June 28, 1971, during which he pledged to transfer power to people within four months, the spokesman said, "Yesterday's broadcast only exposes the design of the junta to continue to cling to power for an unlimited period.

"The whole plan is to buy time to continue with his [Yahya's] acts of genocide and repression in Bangladesh and at the same time to put up a facade of transfer of power. The aim is to secure foreign aid and support," added the Bangladesh spokesman.

The spokesperson further said Yahya's allegations against India were only meant to turn the Liberation War in Bangladesh into an Indo-Pakistan issue.

"But the world knows today that the issue of Bangladesh is nothing but the aspiration of 75 million people to drive out Yahya Khan's troops from the soil of Bangladesh. The Government of India is not a party to it," he added.

MONEM KHAN KILLED

Abdul Monem Khan, former governor of East Pakistan and a collaborator of the Pakistani junta, was shot dead by freedom fighters today. He was buried under tight security precautions.

Former Pakistani president Ayub Khan sent a message of condolence saying Monem Khan was a "great patriot".

Monem Khan became the governor of East Pakistan in 1962 and was removed from office in 1969 at the height of anti-government demonstrations which led to Ayub Khan's ouster from power.

QUESTION OF WAR DEPENDS ON PAKISTAN: INDIRA

"We are a peaceful people. The question of a war with Pakistan depends on that country."

This was Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's comment today about the reported amassing of Pakistani troops along Indian borders. Asked about Indian Foreign Minister Swaran Singh's statement that a solution to the Bangladesh problem within the framework of the Pakistani constitution would be acceptable to India, Indira said, " I think he has been wrongly reported. What we want is that the refugees must be taken back in safety and dignity."

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops in Mand area, killing two and injuring five enemy soldiers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini ambushed an enemy patrol at Baksha, killing four and injuring two.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, a group of Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' patrol in Jotosman area today.  In this action enemy troops suffered 20 casualties.

On the same day Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops on the Bhurungamari-Paglahat road in Rangpur district, killing three and injuring four enemy soldiers.

Another group of Mukti Bahini ambushed a Pakistani patrol at Chakrabeni and killed four of the enemy.

In another operation, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' position near Patnitala, killing six Pakistani soldiers and 17 irregulars. Two brave freedom fighters embraced martyrdom in the action.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
