Bangladesh requests India for recognition
2021-10-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-requests-india-recognition-2198666

October 15, 1971

BANGLADESH GOVT'S LETTER TO INDIRA REQUESTING RECOGNITION

The Bangladesh government-in-exile today sent a letter to Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi requesting recognition to the "free and duly constituted Government of Bangladesh".

"Such a response on your part would give a tremendous impetus to the struggle being waged by the people and the Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh for their liberation. It would also generate an international response which would promote the cause of freedom, peace, and stability in this part of the world," stated the letter.

The letter was jointly signed by acting president Syed Nazrul Islam and Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad.

The letter informed the Indian prime minister about the current status of the liberation struggle and said, "The liberation army of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, the Mukti Bahini, are in full control of half the territory of Bangladesh. We also confirm that the Bangladesh government has established effective civil administration over this area, which is functioning smoothly. This development has not merely been welcomed by the broad masses of the people, but the efforts of our government have found spontaneous and overwhelming support in the areas under its control."

HANOI SUPPORTS BANGLADESH STRUGGLE

North Vietnam extended support to the national liberation struggle movement in Bangladesh. This was stated by the Consul General of North Vietnam Col N A Vu at a news conference in New Delhi today.

Col Vu said, "Our sympathy is with the struggle of the people of East Pakistan. We hope that a political solution will be found for a secure return of the refugees from India to East Pakistan."

US PROPOSAL FOR MUTUAL WITHDRAWAL

The US state department in a telegram sent today asked the US ambassador in India to seek an early appointment with the Indian foreign minister and request him to give "the most careful consideration" to the US proposal for a mutual withdrawal of troops from borders.

The proposal was made, according to the telegram, in the hope that the very substantial movement of men and materiel which has taken place on both sides of the border might be reversed.

The US ambassador in India was also asked to seek Indiaʼs reaction to Pakistan President Yahya Khan's suggestion that the chiefs of staff on both sides might arrange the mechanics of the pullback.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Maheshkundi and killed 10 Pakistani soldiers.

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today ambushed enemy troops in the Ampara area, killing three enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
