Clemency for Bangabandhu if people want it:Yahya
2021-10-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/clemency-bangabandhu-if-people-want-ityahya-2200921

October 18, 1971

YAHYA'S INTERVIEW

Pakistan President Yahya Khan said in an interview published in Le Monde today, " If the people want clemency for Sheikh Mujibur Rahman I would grant it."

He added that he could not hold any discussion with the Bangladesh leader.  "I cannot speak with a rebel unless the court martial which is trying him finds him not guilty," said Yahya.

US URGING INDIA AND PAKISTAN TO SHOW RESTRAINT

The United States expressed concern today over the heightened tensions and build-up of opposing forces along the India-Pakistan border.

Charles W Bray, a state department spokesman, said the United States was urging both India and Pakistan to show restraint in the situation and was practising "a form of preventive diplomacy" with other nations as well. Among the nations reached by American diplomats, officials said, were the Soviet Union, France and Britain.

The United States government acted a day after it was reported that Yahya Khan had proposed that forces be withdrawn from both sides of the border between his country and India.

HOUSE OF COMMONS DISCUSSES BANGLADESH ISSUE

Sir Alec Douglas-Home, UK secretary of state for foreign and commonwealth affairs, today said in the British House of Commons that the responsibility for a political settlement in East Pakistan lay with the Pakistan government and people.

"The humanitarian aspects arc indeed a matter of international concern, and I am pleased to be able to announce that in response to U Thant's recent appeals, and to Prince Sadruddin Khan's appeal of October 11, HM Government are making available a further £7.5 million  for relief among the refugees in India and a further £l million for relief in East Pakistan," added Douglas-Home.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today fired on Pakistani troops in Baoramari of Mymensingh district in which 18 enemy soldiers including one JCO were killed.

The fight at Saldanadi started on October 16 and continued till October 18 when the enemy was repelled. Pakistan troops attacked the Mukti Bahini positions with the entire 33 Baluch Battalion supported by artillery fire and air strafing. The valiant Mukti Bahini fighters withstood the attack and inflicted 70 casualties on the enemy. Many more were injured.

The Pakistan army recovered their dead bodies under cover of artillery fire at night but still they had to leave behind 18 dead bodies which were collected by the Mukti Bahini. Three prisoners including an officer, second Lt Pervez, were captured. Two of them later on succumbed to their injuries. The enemy left behind huge quantity of arms and ammunition including six MMGs.

Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops near Lalmonirhat. In this action they killed four enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini conducted mortar attacks on the enemy troops' position in Guthuma river area on October 18. Five Pakistani soldiers were wounded in this action. On the same day freedom fighters raided the Pakistani army position in Paglirkul area of Noakhali district and exchanged fire with them. In this action, eight enemy soldiers were killed.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
