Indira rules out talks with Yahya
2021-10-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-rules-out-talks-yahya-2201651

October 19, 1971

INTERVIEW WITH INDIRA GANDHI

In an interview published today in The New York Times, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declared that the military situation on the borders between India and Pakistan was "quite grave".

In an hour-long interview, the prime minister added, "We certainly will do nothing to provoke an attack or to start any hostilities, but we have to be alive to our interests and safeguard our security.

"Unfortunately, Pakistan's record has been one of hatred and desperation. The military regime has let loose a war on its own people, and there is no knowing what it will do next".

As to India's military assistance to Bangladeshi freedom fighters, Indira Gandhi did not categorically deny.  She said, "Perhaps you know, they have many helpers, mostly their own people, all over the world. Also, many avenues are open to them".

The Indian prime minister firmly ruled out any peace talk at that time between India and Pakistan, contending that Pakistan would first have to resolve the Bangladesh crisis by negotiating a settlement with the elected representatives.

REPLY TO YAHYA'S STATEMENT

Hossain Ali, head of the Bangladesh mission in India, commenting on Pakistan President Yahya Khan's statement, said today that it was ridiculous to say that Yahya would grant clemency to Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, if people wanted it. He added that the people had chosen Bangabandhu as their undisputed leader in the last election.

Referring to Yahya's statement that he was prepared to discuss the India-Pakistan issue with Indian leaders anywhere and at any time, Hossain Ali said India had nothing to do with Bangladesh affairs. The statement was motivated to drag India into "our affairs". India came into the picture only because "our people had to flee to India as a result of atrocities committed by the Yahya regime", he remarked, and added that India was only interested in the return of over nine million refugees to their home with a sense of security.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini raided occupation troops in Khoribari and killed seven enemy soldiers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini encountered Pakistani troops in Muradpur area killing two enemy soldiers. In an engagement with the occupation troops in Godagarihat area of Dinajpur district, freedom fighters killed five enemy soldiers. They ambushed the Pakistani army patrol in Haragobindapur on the same day and killed one and wounded two enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini launched a mortar attack on the occupation army position in Nalua area of Tangail, killing three enemy soldiers.

At Miarbazar and Pannapur of Comilla district, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' positions. Thirteen enemy soldiers were killed and two were seriously wounded in these operations.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
