Tito calls for political solution to Bangladesh problem
2021-10-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/tito-calls-political-solution-bangladesh-problem-2202366

October 20, 1971

THE SMELL OF WAR

The New York Times, in an editorial published today, stated, "What United Nations Secretary General U Thant called a "potential" threat to peace last August has become too imminent a peril to be longer ignored by the world organisation."

It added, "Although neither Government can rationally want war, the massing of forces [near the border] greatly enhances the danger of conflict through miscalculation."

The newspaper pointed out that the source of the trouble was the continuing military repression in East Pakistan, and the UN must come to grips with this "central problem" to prevent escalation of the crisis to war.

"As the first step," The New York Times suggested, "the UN Security Council might empower the Secretary General to send a fact‐finding mission to East Pakistan and to the refugee camps in India to check conflicting Pakistani and Indian claims about what had been happening in the Bengali region of Pakistan."

TITO SUPPORTS INDIA ON BANGLADESH CRISIS

President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia ended his four‐day state visit to India today after endorsing almost fully India's position on the Bangladesh crisis.

A joint communiqué from Marshal Tito and Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declared their support for "national liberation movements and the struggle against colonial domination". It called for urgent steps to bring about a political solution to the Bangladesh problem.

Both countries said any political solution should be "in accordance with the wishes, inalienable rights and lawful interests of the people of East Bengal".

President Tito said a human approach to Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman would be "in the interest of a peaceful political solution and in the interest of peace and stability in the sub-continent."

US EVALUATION OF MUKTI BAHINI ACTIVITIES

The US Consul General in Dhaka Herbert D Spivack, in a telegram sent to the US State Department today, made the following evaluation of the guerrilla activities inside Bangladesh: "Over past three months East Pakistan insurgency has increased in intensity and widened its geographic scope of operations. Concentrating in the rural areas, with only token activity in cities (exception has been systemic and repeated disruption of power supply to Chittagong), Mukti Bahini (MB) have stepped up their disruption of roads, bridges, railroad lines in most parts of the country. In some districts, notably Dacca, Comilla, Noakhali, Faridpur, Bakarganj, MB seems to be able to move about almost at will and appears even to have set up parallel administration at some points. Evidence on hand suggests that insurgents are better armed than formerly, (automatic weapons, mortars, heavier explosives) and increasingly able undertake sophisticated operations (mining of ships, effective sabotage of bridges, etc.). In central and southern districts mentioned, MB has demonstrated aggressiveness and skill in ambush operations against razakars (voluntary home guards) and army, occasionally inflicting significant casualties. Areas other than those cited above, MB activities [are] largely confined [to] destruction of bridges, culverts, railway lines, apparently avoiding contact with govt forces."

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops numbering about 40 in Khetkibari area of Rangpur district and inflicted 11 casualties on them. One of the freedom fighters was killed during this action.

On the same day, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops' position in Mukundapur of Comilla district and exchanged fire with them. In this action, an enemy soldier was killed. In another ambush near Chauddagram in Comilla, Mukti Bahini guerrillas killed four Pakistani troops.

Mukti Bahini today clashed with the occupation troops in Nazirpur of Netrakona, killing two enemy soldiers and four razakars.

Mukti Bahini today raided a Pakistani position in Sylhet district, killing four enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
