India, Pakistan trade blame
2021-10-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/india-pakistan-trade-blame-2204951

October 24, 1971

JOAN BAEZ SINGS FOR BANGLADESH

Legendary singer, songwriter and activist Joan Baez sang at Crisler Arena in Michigan and appealed to the audience to help the Bangladesh refugees and support the Bangladesh cause. Joan sang for two hours. She presented some original works such as Bangladesh: "When the sun sinks in the West/Die a million people of Bangladesh." Joan punctuated her singing with acerbic remarks thrust at the Nixon administration and establishment politics in general. Twenty thousand people participated in the event.

FIREFIGHT NEAR KASHMIR

An Indian official today accused Pakistan of carrying out mortar attacks in Indian towns near East Pakistan's eastern border that killed five people.

On the other hand, the Pakistan government claimed that its forces in East Pakistan repulsed two battalion-sized attacks today by Banaglee guerrillas supported by Indian troops and artillery. The two attacks were said to have taken place in Cumilla area.

The New York Times, referring to Indian official sources, reported today that about 35 Pakistani and eight Indian soldiers were killed in a series of border clashes in the Uri sector. The sources said the firing was begun by the Pakistanis immediately after their heavy military build-up close to the 500-mile border with Kashmir and was continued intermittently for eight days, added the newspaper.

In a United Nations Day message to his countrymen today, Pakistan President, General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan, alleged that India was eroding the authority of the world body by flaunting the principles of noninterference in neighbours' affairs.

Indian foreign minister Swaran Singh, at a UN day function in New Delhi, said today that Pakistan was unsuccessfully trying to divert the attention of the world by aggressive posturing and build-up of forces and tensions along Indian's borders to cover up its own responsibility for the tragic happenings in East Bengal.

"The international community must realise the urgency and gravity of the problem and the human suffering involved, and discharge a great responsibility devolved on it by acting in a concerted manner," he added.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, freedom fighters today demolished a railway culvert near Bhabanipur. Mukti Bahini captured eight Razakars along with a large quantity of arms and ammunition near Lalpur Police Station. Mukti Bahini in another operation killed five enemy irregulars in the Jagatpur area.

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today raided Shyamnagar Police Station of Satkhira district killing three enemy soldiers. A total of 24 Razakars were held today with 15 rifles by Mukti Bahini guerrillas near Kushtia's Shikarpur area.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini guerrillas today ambushed occupation troops in Parshuram and killed six Pakistani Soldiers. On the same day, in another ambush on enemy soldiers near Rajapur, Mukti Bahini inflicted four casualties on the enemy. On the Cumilla-Daudkandi road, a Pakistan Army truck was blown up by Mukti Bahini today. In this action, six enemy soldiers were killed and the truck was completely destroyed.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
