Indira bars provocation
2021-10-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-bars-provocation-2205706

October 25, 1971

INDIA WILL DO NOTHING TO PROVOKE WAR: INDIRA

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi praised the Indian people for showing utmost restraint and said, "India would do nothing to provoke war". She was addressing the Royal Institute for International Relations in Brussels today.

Asked how she could leave home amid this war-like situation, the Indian premier said, "Because I have full confidence in the Indian people and that they will not do anything to provoke a conflict or to increase tension."

Referring to the Bangladesh crisis Indira Gandhi said it was not a civil war in the conventional sense. It was a genocidal pogrom of civilians.

Indira Gandhi said a political solution must be found to this problem, and, to be effective, it must be acceptable to the elected representatives of the peoples of Bangladesh.

"To hold elections for seats, which are not vacant, in the present conditions of repression and chaos, has no meaning or purpose," she added.

Her official tour to six western countries including the USA and Britain began on October 24, 1971.

In a speech at the National Defense College in New Delhi, The Indian Defence Minister Jagjivan Ram said today that as long as the Pakistani threat existed India would not pull her troops back from the border.

India would not commit aggression against Pakistan but would resist any attack with full force, he added.

DAN COGGIN'S CABLE

The Times today published a cable sent by its correspondent Dan Coggin who visited deep inside East Pakistan. The cable read: "For seven hours we plied deeper into Gopalganj subdivision in southern Faridpur district…A Mukti Bahini captain told me that the Bengali rebels are following the three-stage guerrilla warfare strategy of the Viet Cong, and are now in the first phase of organization and staging hit-and-run attacks. So far, the guerrillas in the captain's area of operations have lost about 50 men, and larger army attacks are expected. But the Mukti Bahini plan to mount ambushes and avoid meeting army firepower head-on."

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jassore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today ambushed the Pakistani patrol in Ramnagar area and killed three enemy soldiers. In another ambush near Bethuli area, freedom fighters killed one Pakistani soldier and three razakars. Another group of Mukti Bahini repulsed an enemy attack on their position at Padmasanka.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chittagong sector, Mukti Bahini today ambushed Pakistani troops in Anandapur killing four soldiers and injuring three.

In Sylhet, freedom fighters today blew up the Goyan-Sarighat bridge.

Pakistani troops attacked the Mukti Bahini in Bali area today. It was reported that ammunitions were exhausted on both sides after heavy fighting. Then a hand-to-hand fight took place. As a result, at least 25 enemy soldiers were killed. Two freedom fighters were also killed during this action.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
