Tajuddin hopeful of Chinese support
2021-10-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/tajuddin-hopeful-chinese-support-2206376

October 26, 1971

HELP OFFERED FOR BANGLADESHI REFUGEES

Thirteen nations and five international organisations agreed in Paris today to a worldwide effort to meet the cost of the growing refugee problem in India. The number of refugees were put at more than 9.5 million. The expenditure needed to care for the East Pakistanis was put at $700 million until the end of March 1973. It was agreed that such costs were creating an intolerable burden on India.

Representatives of Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the United States attended the meeting with delegates from India, the IMF, UNICEF, the High Commissioner for Refugees and the OECD.

CHINA CONGRATULATED

Bangladesh Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad today congratulated China on her entry to the UN and hoped that the people of the country would declare their solidarity with the people of Bangladesh in the struggle for liberation.

He added that the UN decision to accept China to its fold once again proved that "conspiracies of the reactionary forces are bound to fail in every age".

INDIRA DEFENDS SOVIET ARMS AID

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said in Brussels today that there was nothing unusual in receiving "massive arms deliveries" from the Soviet Union.

As to the possible Indian intervention in the East Pakistan crisis, India Gandhi said India had no desire to force a solution on the inhabitants of East Pakistan. They should be allowed to decide their own future, she added.

She urged the rich nations to come forward to support the refugees, adding that they werenot doing enough to help the refugees. Of an estimated $800 million required, she shared, $140 million had been promised and no more than $30 million provided.

BANGLADESH DELEGATION IN THE UN

The Bangladesh government, in a press release issued today, stated that the16-member Bangladesh delegation to United Nations General Assembly session had effectively presented to the international community the background and the current position of the Bangladesh movement for total independence from the colonial rule of West Pakistan. The members of Bangladesh delegation also contacted the American intelligentsia and received overwhelming support from them. The Pakistani attempt to prevent the delegation from lobbying in the UN proved futile, claimed the press release.

It further said many delegations expressed their support for the cause of Bangladesh during their speeches in the General Assembly session which proved that Bangladesh is not an internal affair of Pakistan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jassore-Khulna sector, freedom fighters fired on Pakistani soldiers at Goalhati, killing one and injuring several soldiers. Mukti Bahini blew up the railway track between Godkhali and Nabharan, disrupting the enemy's communication line. On the same day, freedom fighters captured 18 razakars along with 14 rifles at Churamankati.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini attacked Pakistani troops with mortars near Kaimpur area and killed six enemy soldiers. One Pakistani army truck was destroyed in Chhagalnaiya by mines planted by freedom fighters. Seven Pakistani regulars and five irregulars were killed in the action.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
