Nazrul seeks China’s support
2021-10-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nazrul-seeks-chinas-support-2207141

October 27, 1971

FAMINE AVERTED FOR NOW

A briefing dated October 27, 1971, prepared for US President Richard Nixon, concluded that the widespread famine with associated deaths and an accelerated refugee flow to India -- predicted by many last summer -- would not occur in East Pakistan during the winter. The briefing was based upon an on-the-sport review report from the Deputy Aid Administrator Maurice Williams, who had investigated the danger of famine in East Pakistan.

The report cited the following reasons behind this development: Reduction of the East Pakistani population by nine million (13 percent) who had moved to India; shipment of one million tonnes of grain by the US;  US support for transportation from ocean ports to river ports in East Pakistan; the end of a black market flow of rice, normally one million tonnes annually, from East Pakistan into India as a result of border tension; the UN role in making food distribution neutral in the "civil conflict" and the prospect of the winter crop beginning in late November, 1971.

The report, however, cautioned that the situation in East Pakistan was still grim and that continuous relief assistance would be needed. Maurice Williams identified March, 1972 as the next critical period.

NAZRUL'S LETTER TO MAO

The acting president of Bangladesh Syed Nazrul Islam today sought China's support for the liberation struggle of the Bangladeshi people. In a felicitation message, sent to Chairman Mao on the occasion of China's entry into the UN, he said the Government of Bangladesh considered this as a victory for the people of a great nation who had achieved independence from colonial powers through armed struggle. He added the people of Bangladesh were now engaged in a similar struggle and they "seek China's support for their right to freedom and self-determination".

'NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT ESSENTIAL'

Bangladesh National Awami Party (Muzaffar) expressed its willingness for a political solution provided independence of Bangladesh was accepted, West Pakistani soldiers were withdrawn from Bangladesh and Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was released. In a statement released today, NAP (M) President Muzaffar Ahmed said to accelerate liberation, complete unity of all the fighting forces in the shape of a National Liberation Front was essential.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Dhaka-Comilla-Chittagong sector, Mukti Bahini fired with mortars on the Pakistani position at Nayanpur in Comilla district and killed five enemy soldiers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini guerrillas ambushed Pakistani troops at Gilatala, killing three soldiers. In another ambush, Mukti Bahini killed two and injured three Pakistani soldiers at Jaynagar. Another group of Mukti Bahini fired with mortars on the occupation army position at Koteswar, Comilla. In this action two enemy soldiers were killed and three injured.

Mukti Bahini killed 17 occupation soldiers, including one major and one captain, in Kaliakoir area of Dhaka district by blowing up a vehicle carrying enemy troops. On the same day, freedom fighters killed 25 razakars and captured 23 rifles in the same area.

In the Rangpur-Rajshahi-Dinajpur sector, the freedom fighters ambushed a mixed Pakistani patrol in Jagatpur area of Rangpur district, killing nine enemy soldiers and injuring four. In another operation, Mukti Bahini ambushed a column of Pakistani vehicles and destroyed one jeep and one truck. In this action, 25 Pakistani soldiers belonging to 25 Punjab Regiment lost their lives. Five dead bodies of the enemy were recovered by Mukti Bahini from the area. A large number of Chinese weapons were also captured.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
