‘Urgent UN intervention needed’
2021-10-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/urgent-un-intervention-needed-2208101

October 28, 1971

THE NEW YORK TIMES CALLS FOR URGENT UN INTERVENTION

The New York Times, in an editorial published today, stated, "The growing threat of war between India and Pakistan creates an urgent need for United Nations intervention -- but not on the terms proposed by Islamabad."

It added, "Any mediation effort by [UN Secretay General] U Thant or his representative should be in the first instance between the Pakistan government and leaders of the outlawed Awami League, the elected representatives of the people of East Pakistan -- not between Islamabad and New Delhi. Any call for a mutual withdrawal of forces must be accompanied by vigorous efforts to repatriate the refugees under conditions of justice and security."

PAKISTAN DENOUNCES TITO'S STATEMENT

Pakistan denounced the joint statement on Bangladesh issued by Yugoslavia President Josip Broz Tito and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as a "direct interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan". The joint statement called for political solution to the Bangladesh problem, acceptable to its elected members.

500 GIRLS LANGUISHING IN CAMPS

A top-ranking Awami League leader disclosed that about 500 Bangalee young girls were still in captivity in three concentration camps in East Pakistan under the control of the Pakistani military authorities. He further said the acting president and the prime minister of Bangladesh had already appealed to the leaders of the world to rescue these girls.

90,000 REFUGEE CHILDREN MAY DIE IN 3 WEEKS

About 90,000 Bangladeshi children who suffered from acute malnutrition in refugee camps might die in the next three weeks unless a crash programme to treat them was taken up immediately, said the Director General of Indian Health Service JB Srivastav.  He further informed that of the four million children in the refugee camps, about 200,000 suffered from malnutrition.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini today engaged Pakistani troops in Goalhat and killed two soldiers.

Freedom fighters today captured two razakars with rifles in Araihazar area of Dhaka district.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
