Yahya’s election drama
2021-10-30T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahyas-election-drama-2209441

October 30, 1971

NIXON'S LETTER TO YAHYA

US President Richard Nixon, in a letter sent today, appreciated Pakistan President Yahya Khan for his "prompt and positive" response to the US proposal for withdrawal of forces from the border with India.

He, however, added, "There are still serious risks in the present situation and hostilities could still erupt inadvertently. Such hostilities could easily escalate with a much wider conflict with tragic consequences for the entire South Asian subcontinent."

Nixon opined that the United Nations had a serious responsibility to act in ways that would help reduce tensions and begin the "difficult task of building a lasting peace in that area".

Nixon concluded the letter with the suggestion that Yahya should work for restoring normalcy in East Pakistan so that flow of refugees into India halts and a "viable political accommodation among all the people of Pakistan" can be achieved.

35 ELECTED UNOPPOSED TO EAST PAKISTAN ASSEMBLY

The curtain was partly lifted today over the next scene in the election drama being staged by the Pakistani military authorities in East Pakistan. Of the 105 seats in the Provincial Assembly which were up for election following the unseating of the Awami League representatives, 35 candidates were provisionally declared elected unopposed. Today was the last day for withdrawal of nominations for the by-elections to the Provincial Assembly.

Eleven of those candidates belonged to the Jamaat-e-Islami , seven to the Muslim League (Quyyum Group), four each to the Pakistan Democratic Party, the Muslim League (Council) and the Muslim League (Convention), two to the Nizam-e-Islam and three are independents.

YAHYA RENEWS APPEAL TO REFUGEES

Yahya today made another appeal to refugees to return to their homes in East Pakistan. According to Radio Pakistan, Yahya in a statement released from Rawalpindi assured the "displaced persons" that irrespective of religion and caste they could all return to their homes without fear and with a complete sense of security.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Naval commandos of the Mukti Bahini today sunk American freighter Loren at Londonghat in Chandpur. The ship had been carrying arms and ammunitions to be unloaded at Chandpur. Due to explosion of a mine laid by Mukti Bahini, Londonghat was also damaged. Crew of the ship and five sentries were drowned.

Mukti Bahini today raided Pakistani troops' position at Meabazar, Comilla, killing four and injuring seven enemy soldiers. Another group of freedom fighters ambushed Pakistan troops and razakars in Hajatkhola of the same district and killed 15 Pakistani soldiers including one captain, and injured 20.

UN GETS MORE AID FOR BANGLADESH REFUGEES

The United Nations announced new contributions from Australia and Denmark for the relief of Bangladesh refugees. Australia and Denmark would contribute 2.5 million Australian dollars and 2.5 million Danish Krone, respectively.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
