“I am sitting on the top of a volcano”: Indira
2021-10-31T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/i-am-sitting-the-top-volcano-indira-2210146

October 31, 1971

BANGLADESH PROBLEM DOMINATES INDIRA'S TALK WITH HEATH

The Bangladesh problem dominated the talks Indira Gandhi had with Heath today at the British prime minister's country residence outside London. The two prime ministers discussed the Bangladesh situation and shared their common desire to find a political solution to the problem. They also agreed that the political settlement must be acceptable to the elected and accepted political leaders of East Bengal.

On the same day, Indira Gandhi addressed a meeting organised by the Indian League in London. She said, "I feel that I am sitting on the top of a volcano and I honestly do not know when it is going to erupt. So the question is not of how restrained we are today, but of what will happen across the border."

"We think this is the responsibility of the international community to see that a way out is found. Obviously, the best way, the most humane way, is to have a political settlement and that political settlement can only be with the elected leader of the people of Bangladesh, and with the elected and accepted representatives of that country," she added.

A letter calling on India to recognise Bangladesh was handed to Indira Gandhi. The letter was from the Action Committee for the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh in the United Kingdom.

INSIDE BANGLADESH

The Sunday Times today published a report which they claimed they obtained from East Pakistan. They didn't disclose the name of the author of the report. The report informed that an estimated 800 Mukti Bahini operating in Dhaka launched a series of daylight bomb attacks on public buildings, forcing the Pakistan Army into tight defensive positions in the city. "On October 19," the report continued "a bomb explosion at 10.57am outside the Habib Bank building in Motijheel, the city's main business centre, killed five people, injured 13 others and wrecked seven cars, one taxi and two cycle-rickshaws. Next day, another bomb exploded on the fourth-floor of the State Bank building down the road. No one was killed but the explosion rocked the building, which also houses the local offices of the World Bank."

"For its part, the Pakistan Army has considerably strengthened security measures in the city, particularly in and around Dacca Airport. These are as much a precaution against guerrilla activities as against the threat of war with India," added the report.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chittagong sector, freedom fighters today ambushed the Pak troops in Bijoypur area and killed 13 Pak soldiers and injured 20. In that operation one freedom fighter lost his life and another one was wounded.

The freedom fighters today captured 12 Razakars with 9 rifles in Shahgam area in the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector.

NEW TAXES IN KERALA TO MEET BANGLADESH SITUATION

The chief minister of Kerala, Achutha Menon, said today that the State Government proposed to levy additional taxes to meet the situation precipitated by the Bangladesh problem.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
