War imminent: Yahya
2021-11-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/war-imminent-yahya-2211031

November 1, 1971

KENNEDY ASKS FOR UN DEBATE

US Senator Edward M Kennedy urged the Nixon administration today to support efforts to bring the Bangladesh situation before the United Nations General Assembly in the interests of reaching a political solution.

He also recommended that the US administration help arrange an immediate visit by the International Red Cross mission in Pakistan to Awami League leader Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman who had been imprisoned by the Pakistani government. Positive information on the welfare and fate of Bangabandhu, the senator believed, would help reduce tensions throughout the area.

CHINA WILL HELP US: YAHYA

Pakistan President Yahya Khan, in an interview with Newsweek, said the war between Pakistan and India was imminent. "I have no reason to tell you war [with India] is not imminent because it is," he told the magazine. "The Indians are already at war with us and the only reason there is no general confrontation is that we are not hitting back."

Yahya further said he didn't want to escalate the already tense situation, but noted that "if the Indians escalate with a view to capturing territory and installing a puppet Bangladesh regime that will be war".

And if it comes to that, Yahya claimed, China would not tolerate an attack on Pakistan. "We will get all the weapons and ammunition we need, every assistance short of physical intervention," added Yahya.

INDIRA GANDHI CRITICISES US VIEW ON REFUGEE AID

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi today warned that the influx of East Pakistani refugees had strained India beyond breaking point. Criticising the US stand regarding the Bangladesh issue, she said, "I think the US is taking a rather short‐term view of this situation. Perhaps this is because the countries involved are far from the West. But we are living with this horror from day to day -- this exodus of millions of helpless people."

The Indian prime minister, on a three‐week foreign tour, was spending five days in Britain to discuss the deteriorating situation in the sub-continent.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today killed one enemy soldier in Birishiri-Bijaipur road in Mymensingh district by mine explosion. Mukti Bahini also raided Dulirgaon area. In this action they killed 12 enemy soldiers and a large number of razakars. Freedom fighters removed telephone lines between Phulpur and Haluaghat on the same day.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Kahur area in Dhaka district, killing two enemy soldiers and injuring three.

Mukti Bahini also ambushed Pakistani troops in Noapara of Jashore district killing six and injuring four enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
