Indira, Nixon confer
2021-11-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-nixon-confer-2221611

November 4, 1971

INDIRA MEETS NIXON

Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi called on US president Nixon today at the White House. The two-hour talk covered the Bangladesh issue in substantial detail.

Indira described the atrocities which were occurring in Bangladesh. She pointed out that despite oppressive measures, the Pakistani military had been unable to establish control in the area. She further noted that India had been accused of supporting guerrilla activity but that the situation was not that clear. She drew a parallel to the problems the US government had when Cuban refugees based in Florida launched forays against the Cuban mainland. She added that realities were that it was no longer realistic to expect East and West Pakistan to remain together.

The Indian premier then turned to the great numbers of refugees who continued to stream across the border from East Pakistan. "I come here in search of some wise impulse that has sometimes worked to save humanity from despair," she declared.

President Nixon stated that US efforts with respect to Pakistan were designed to alleviate the situation along constructive lines. The restrictions the US had placed on military assistance to East Pakistan had been undertaken with the relationships with India clearly in mind, added Nixon.

Indira replied that the crucial issue remained the future of Mujib who was a symbol of the imperative for autonomy.

Nixon further noted that president Yahya had indicated a willingness to undertake some pullback unilaterally. If India now believed, Nixon continued, that such a step would not contribute to lessening of tensions, it would be necessary for the US to reconsider its efforts to effect such a pullback by Pakistani forces. PN Haksar, Indira's principal secretary, shared the difficulties for India posed by the displacement of Indian forces.

NAZRUL APPEALS FOR U THANT'S INTERVENTION

The acting president of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Syed Nazrul Islam, made an appeal today to the UN secretary-general U Thant to urgently intervene in saving the life of Hussain Ali and his family, who had been beaten and kept captive in the Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi.

In a telegram sent to the UN secretary-general, the acting president called upon the world body to condemn the Pakistan government for the violence that they let loose on Bangladesh nationals which had of late been extended from the occupied area of Bangladesh to the precincts of diplomatic missions in the foreign countries.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today brought Barni and Dakterbari of Sylhet district under their control after killing 23 regular Pakistani soldiers. The freedom fighters captured nine Razakars with 21 rifles in Chandpur area today. In another operation, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops position at Hugli tea garden. In this action, four enemy soldiers were killed and six wounded.

Mukti Bahini today captured Barhatta Police Station and Tantar areas of Mymensingh district after clearing West Pakistani policemen and Razakars. They held the officer-in-charge of the police station and 105 Razakars. They also seized an LMG and 80 rifles from the police station. From Tantar, the freedom fighters captured 12 bombs and a few mortars.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
