US will cancel licences to ship arms to Pakistan
2021-11-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/us-will-cancel-licences-ship-arms-pakistan-2223756

November 7, 1971

US WILL STOP ARMS EXPORT TO PAKISTAN

The United States decided to cancel licences for the export of more than $3-million worth of military equipment to Pakistan. The action would in effect shut the controversial arms pipeline that supplied Pakistan with spare parts and other military goods even though the Administration imposed an arms freeze in April, 1971.

In disclosing the cut-off of licences, State Department officials emphasised that the action was being taken with the consent of the Pakistani government, which was aware of the strong Congressional opposition to the continued shipment of goods to Pakistan.

The officials said that Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India was informed of the licence revocation decision shortly before she arrived in Washington for talks with President Nixon.

PAKISTAN POLITICIAN SLAIN

A right-wing politician recently named by Pakistani authorities as a member of the future East Pakistan Provincial Assembly was assassinated today, allegedly by guerrillas with submachine guns. He was identified as Gultanubdin Khan, a member of the Moslem League.

Another man, Ahmed Hossain, was reportedly slain with Gultanubuddin today at Naryanganj..  Hossain was a member of a local "peace committee."

Yesterday, another politician was killed in downtown Dhaka, again allegedly by guerrillas, and several others were killed in country areas.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, Mukti Bahini engaged Pakistani troops in Saldanadi of Cumilla district killing 2 and injuring 4 enemy soldiers. On the same day, in another engagement with the Pakistani troops in Kaimpur area, 3 enemy soldiers were killed. Another group of Mukti Bahini made a repulsive attack on the occupation troops in Mandabhag area of Cumilla district inflicting 15 casualties. During this action three freedom fighters were also injured. Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Radanagar killing 2 and injuring 3 enemy soldiers. In another ambush in Latimia area 2 enemy soldiers were killed and 2 were injured.

In the Jashore-Kushtia-Khulna sector, 3 Razakars were captured today with 4 rifles in Shahapur area. Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani army patrol in Ramkrishna killing 5 and injuring 3 enemy soldiers.

In an ambush in Gosainghat of Dinajpur district Mukti Bahini killed one enemy soldier and injured three.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
