China pledges aid to Pakistan
2021-11-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/china-pledges-aid-pakistan-2223126

November 6, 1971

CHINA PLEDGES 'RESOLUTE SUPPORT' IF PAKISTAN INVADED

China called on India and Pakistan today to find a peaceful solution to their frontier dispute, but warned that it would "resolutely support" Pakistan in the event of war.

The warning came in a speech by the Acting Foreign Minister, Chi Peng'fei, at a banquet marking the completion of talks between Chinese leaders and a Pakistani delegation led by the former Foreign Minister, Zulfikar, Ali Bhutto.

"Our Pakistan friends may rest assured that should Pakistan be subjected to foreign aggression, the Chinese Government and people will, as always, resolutely support the Pakistan Government and people," Chi declared.

Earlier, Chinese Premier Chou En'lai held a second round of talks today with a Pakistani delegation headed by Zulfikar All Bhutto, special envoy of President Yahya Khan. The discussions, which began yesterday, reportedly dealt with tension on the Indian-Pakistani border. Pakistan shared ideas with the Chinese delegation that would leave shortly for the United Nations on how the Indian-Pakistani crisis could be handled in the Security Council.

INDIRA GANDHI CALLS REFUGEES BURDEN

India Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said today that the flow of refugees from East Bengal had resulted in a "terrific burden" on India and posed "a real threat to our political stability and even our independence."

Speaking extemporaneously before an audience of 400 at Columbia University's School of International Affairs, Indira Gandhi warned that "the limits of [India's] endurance had been reached".

"India is determined to safeguard her interests, India is united as never before," said Indira Gandhi. "We want your help. We want your support. We want your sympathy. But India is prepared, to fight alone for what it thinks is worth fighting for."

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Rangpur-Dinajpur-Rajshahi sector, Mukti Bahini today raided Pakistani Army position in Paharpukur area killing 10 enemy soldiers. During the operation one freedom fighter embraced martyrdom. On the same day, 8 Razakars with 5 Rifles were captured by Freedom fighters in Karnai area of Rangpur district.

In the Dhaka-Cumilla-Chattogram sector, two enemy soldiers were killed and three wounded due to explosion of mine laid by freedom fighters in Chandidwar area. On the same day Mukti Bahini fired on the Pakistani troops in the same area killing 2 enemy soldiers and injuring four.

In the Mymensingh-Sylhet, Mukti Bahini clashed with the occupation troops in Melandaha-Mahmudpur area. During this clash 12 enemy soldiers including one JCO were killed and four were wounded. One of our freedom fighters also laid down his life.

A United Nations vessel loaded with wheat was heavily damaged by a mine deployed by Mukti Bahini at Chandpur. The freedom fighters had been preying heavily on water vessels in East Pakistan in recent weeks, but this was the first report that a United Nations vessel had been attacked.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
