East Bengal can’t remain united with Pakistan: Indira
2021-11-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/east-bengal-cant-remain-united-pakistan-indira-2224406

November 8, 1971

CHINA WILL INTERVENE, SAYS YAHYA

Pakistan President Yahya Khan was today quoted as saying that China would intervene in the event of an Indian attack on Pakistan. Radio Pakistan said Yahya Khan made the observation in an interview with the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS). The statement differed from the one made by him in a recent interview with Newsweek in which he said China would help Pakistan in every way 'short of intervention'.

Yahya's reference to the possibility of Chinese intervention in a conflict in the sub-continent was timed to coincide with the conclusion of a high-level Pakistani mission to Peking led by ZA Bhutto.

Meanwhile, Bhutto said on his return from Peking today that diversionary action by China on India's northern frontier in the event of a war on the subcontinent was a "superficial matter." He said, "We are not interested in diversions. We are interested in the heart of the matter. We want peace. We cherish peace. We will never be the first to aggress or to fire the first shot. Those who will aggress against the sacred soil of Pakistan, they will be doomed on Pakistan soil."

INDIA WILL NOT BROOK SITUATION FOR LONG: INDIRA

Indira Gandhi said in Paris today that India could not tolerate the tension on its border with Pakistan for long. In an interview on French TV, she said," I feel I am sitting on a volcano." "India will do everything to prevent war," she added.

Questioned on the possible breakup of Pakistan, she said, "I don't think any country in its right mind would want its neighbour to disintegrate. We have enough problems of our own besides having a weak neighbour. But it is our assessment that East Bengal can't remain united with Pakistan ever again in the same way as it has been."

WORLD PEACE COUNCIL FOR INDEPENDENCE

World Peace Council stood for independence of Bangladesh, Lucio Luzata, a member of the presidential committee of the council, said at a press conference today. He informed that the Council had formally condemned massacres perpetrated by the Pakistani Army against unarmed civilians in East Pakistan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini today blew up one Pakistani Army Jeep by exploding a mine in the Jashore district. In this action 3 enemy soldiers were killed. Another group of Mukti Bahini raided the Pakistani Army position in the Rasikpur area and killed 15 enemy soldiers. They also destroyed 5 bunkers of the enemy.

Mukti Bahini encountered Pakistani troops at Shahbazpur in Pabna district today killing 3 and injuring 3 enemy soldiers. On the same day, Mukti Bahini killed 3 enemy soldiers in an ambush in the Kajaldighi area.

Mukti Bahini fired today on Pakistani troops resting in the Koteshwar area of Cumilla district. In this action, 20 enemy soldiers were killed.

Mukti Bahini raided today Dakhingul Tea factory, a camp of occupation troops, and killed 13 enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
