‘Bangladesh struggle a liberation movement’
2021-11-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-struggle-liberation-movement-2225201

November 9, 1971

SOVIET LEADER RECOGNISES LIBERATION MOVEMENT

The leader of the Soviet parliamentary delegation in India, Kudrayavetsev, described the Bangladesh struggle as a "national liberation movement with elements of civil war in it". He was speaking at the press club in New Delhi today.

This was the first time that a Soviet leader openly characterised the Bangladesh struggle as a national liberation movement. What was more significant that Kudrayavestev made it clear that he was speaking not merely as a visiting parliamentarian, but as a representative of the Soviet Union and its government.

COLLECTIVE FINES WILL BE IMPOSED

Pakistani authorities announced that collective fines would be imposed on entire communities in East Pakistan in case of any guerrilla action against the government, reported The New York Times today.

In Dhaka, according to the newspaper, union and ward committees were warned that when bombings, shootings or other anti-government incidents take place, local populations would be subjected to special fines. Local civic committees were instructed to report any guerrilla activity or face punishment.

The warnings, however, were seen by many residents as modification of government policies. Collective responsibility had been imposed by the authorities in March 1971, when the crackdown began, opined The New York Times. The painting of slogans on house walls had been punished by demolition of the houses. Villages in which Pakistani troops were resisted had been burned to the ground, and the army's typical operations were of the search-and‐destroy kind.

The newspaper further reported that political assassinations by the guerrillas reached a rate of at least half dozen a day in East Pakistan, and bomb explosions were heard in Dhaka during the day and night.

KENNEDY WELCOMES HALT OF ARMS SHIPMENT TO PAKISTAN

Senator Kennedy welcomed the halt in shipments of military aid to Pakistan and described it as "the first step in what he hoped will be a redirecting of the US policy in South Asia". He, however, informed that the State Department order excluded some $160,000 worth of items cleared by customs in New York which were awaiting shipment to Pakistan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pak patrol in Shyamganj-Shambhuganj area of Mymensingh district today killing seven Pakistani soldiers and injuring five. Two freedom fighters were injured in the action.

On the same day, freedom fighters ambushed enemy troops travelling in three army jeeps near Piarpur in Mymensingh. Three enemy soldiers were killed and two of their vehicles were destroyed. Mukti Bahini captured three rifles from the enemy.

Mukti Bahini fired with mortars on a Pakistani troops position in Akulpur area of Comilla district killing three enemy soldiers. In another attack on the occupation troops in the same area, Mukti Bahini killed two and injured three enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini today attacked with mortars on Pakistani troops entrenched in the strategically important Kadamtoli bridge area on the outskirts of Satkhira. In this action, three enemy soldiers were killed and several injured.

Mukti Bahini engaged with Pakistani troops approximately 600 in strength moving in Chapitala area of Cumilla. The fight continued for five hours in which the enemy suffered heavy casualties.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
