Operation X, a tale of Liberation War launched in Bangla
2021-11-08T22:10:59+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/arts-entertainment/event/news/operation-x-tale-liberation-war-launched-bangla-2225006

Operation X, a tale of the War of Liberation was launched in Bangla at an event today.

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haq was present at the chief guest while LGRD State Minister Swapan Bhattacharjee attented the launching ceremony as special guest at the Westin Hotel today, according to a press release from the High Commission of India in Dhaka.

Operation X, co-written by Indian Capt MNR Samant and noted author and journalist Sandeep Unnithan, tells how commando operations, jointly undertaken by the Mukti Bahini and Indian Navy took place during the Liberation War in 1971.

The Operation was conceptualised by the then Indian Navy chief Admiral SM Nanda and Captain (later Vice Admiral) Mihir K Roy and was executed by Capt MNR Samant.

Over 450 naval commandos were trained and infiltrated into erstwhile East Pakistan to disrupt the Pakistani military and logistics lines of supply by destroying watercraft, jetties, and marine infrastructure so that Pakistani forces could not resupply themselves, which ultimately led to their swift capitulation in 13 days of War, said the release.

Along with commando operations, the book also talked about the raid on Mongla port by gunboats Padma and Polash, the two gunboats provided by the Indian Navy with a mixed Bangladeshi and Indian crew.

The Naval Commando Operation X or NCO(X) was part of "Operation Jackpot", which entailed covert training and equipping of the Mukti Bahini. Overall, between August and November 1971, the commandos sank/disabled 100,000 tonnes of enemy shipping and completely blocked the ports of East Pakistan, added the release.

In sheer scale, this was the largest covert operation undertaken anywhere in the world after World War II.

The story, which remained untold for 48 years, was first released in English in 2019.

It has been compiled from personal notes of Capt MNR Samant and firsthand accounts of Indian Naval Personnel and Muktijuddhas who participated in the operations.
