UN Mission may withdraw
2021-11-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/un-mission-may-withdraw-2226051

November 10, 1971

BANGLADESH CONFERENCE IN WASHINGTON

A nine-day national conference titled "Consultation on the American Response to events in East Pakistan" began today in Washington DC. The conference was organised primarily by the representatives of church groups (including the National council of Churches, the Friends and the Unitarian Universalist Association) which attracted about 100 public figures from many parts of the US and Canada.

The lead speech was given by Senator Kennedy. In his brief address Kennedy criticised the US policy and decried the terror which had resulted in the daily deaths of 4300 children in the refugee camps in India.

Mujahid Hussain, first secretary of the Embassy of Pakistan, was scheduled to speak at the conference but after arriving in the hall he abruptly walked out after noticing the name of SAMS Kibria of the Bangladesh Mission on the program. Pakistan Embassy later issued a condemnation of the conference.

Enayet Karim addressed the conference on behalf of Bangladesh, following an address by Maharajakrishna Rasgotra, minister for political affairs, Embassy of India.

The conference was presided over by Dr Homer Jack, secretary general of the World Conference of Religion for peace.

UN MISSION IN DHAKA FACING TROUBLE

The head of the emergency United Nations Mission in Bangladesh would leave Dhaka soon for New York with a report that the steadily escalating level of fighting there threatened to make the mission's job impossible, reported the Baltimore Sun.

Baltimore Sun correspondent, John Woodruff, reporting from Dhaka said  Paul-Marc Henry, the UN Assistant Secretary-General who headed the mission in Bangladesh, was having trouble in reaching liberated areas without new arrangements involving permission from the Bangladesh Government. Many foreign correspondents also reported that at least a quarter of the total land of Bangladesh was now under control of the Government of Bangladesh.

Woodruff also pointed out that the West Pakistani Generals in Bangladesh not yet agreed to let the UN mission distribute food directly to the people.

14-YEAR JAIL

Jail terms of 14 years' rigorous imprisonment was handed down to each of 55 civil servants who had fled Pakistan following the March crackdown, a military source announced. All the accused were tried in absentia by a military court in East Pakistan. Four senior professors of Dhaka and Rajshahi Universities were among those convicted.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Khulna-Jashore-Kushtia sector, Mukti Bahini made surprise raids today on para-military camps of the enemy at Shakura and Mohanpur. Several enemy irregulars were killed in the action. Mukti Bahini captured 57 rifles and guns from these camps.

Mukti Bahini blew up train carrying occupation troops by explosion of mines near Kurigram today. In that action 8 Pakistani soldiers including one officer were killed and eight bogies of the train were damaged. On the same day another vehicle carrying Pakistani troops from Kurigram to Chilmari was ambushed by the freedom fighters. In that action two Pakistani soldiers, 3 Razakars and the driver of the vehicle were killed.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
