Indira rules out Tashkent-type talks
2021-11-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-rules-out-tashkent-type-talks-2227831

November 12, 1971

INDIRA GANDHI'S PRESS CONFERENCE

A Tashkent-type conference is not possible to solve the crisis created by Pakistan. But no problem is unsolvable and that even at the last moment the world can make the Yahya regime see reason and bow to the wishes of Bangalees. Indira Gandhi stressed these points in her press conference today in Bonn. She, however, made it clear that India would not allow the crisis to continue for long because the Bangladeshi refugees must go back in safety and with dignity.

FEAR OF FULL WAR BY INDIA, PAKISTAN

US Secretary of State William P Rogers expressed the administration's growing concern today that the border clashes between India and Pakistan might lead to an all-out war. Addressing a press briefing, Rogers said that the United States had "urgently counseled both sides to follow maximum restraint" and was "quietly trying to defuse the situation" between the two South Asian neighbors. In answer to a question, Rogers said that the United States, in case of war, "will do everything we can to stay out."

Pakistani Foreign Secretary Sultan Mohammad Khan said today that there is a "virtual state of war" with India along the borders of Pakistan. He said at a news conference at United Nations headquarters that only "extreme patience and care" by Pakistan had kept this "state of war" from being "expanded." Sultan, who was en route to Washington in a world tour in which he had already visited Moscow and Peking, indicated that Pakistan was not planning at this time to ask the Security Council to act.

YAHYA REJECTS NURUL AMIN'S REQUEST

Pakistan President Yahya Khan rejected Nurul Amin's request for an early release of the draft constitution to enable political parties to formulate their points of view in advance, reported The Pakistan Times today. The paper quoted Nurul Amin saying that though he was not shown the draft constitution he could conclude from his discussion with the president that separate electorate system would be provided in the proposed constitution.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini raided a Pakistani camp at Alamdanga in Kushtia district today killing 17 Pakistani soldiers. Two freedom fighters embraced martyrdom in the action. On the same day, Mukti Bahini destroyed two ferry boats near Kamarkhali Ghat.

Muktibahini ambushed today occupation troops in Karnail Bazar area killing eight enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops in Arial area of Sylhet today killing seven enemy soldiers. On the same day in another ambush in Teliapara area Muktibahini killed four Pakistani soldiers. In Jurigowalbari Mukti Bahini killed five occupation soldiers and one Razakar today. Besides, road communication was disrupted by destroying a bridge between Jaintiapur and Kalinagar area.

In a report titled "Dacca Business Centre shaken by bomb blast" The Daily Telegraph of London today said that a heavy explosion had shaken business centre of Dacca yesterday when a bomb exploded in a car a few yards from the entrance to the main post office. A reliable British eyewitness saw one man killed but later it was learnt three people were killed, the newspaper added.

It further said that the morale of 6,000 West Pakistan policemen who were brought to East Pakistan in March was at a very low point. "They are beginning to show signs of severe strain. Several units have been confined to barracks for the past week," added The Daily Telegraph.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
