Pakistan-China meeting at UN
2021-11-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/pakistan-china-meeting-un-2228421

November 13, 1971

BACK HOME, INDIRA GANDHI WARNS OF RISING DANGER

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, returning from a three'week Western tour, said today that the military confrontation with Pakistan was becoming "less and less tolerable".

In her 10'minute airport meeting with the press, she carefully avoided giving any hint of what steps she was contemplating to deal with the border crisis.

"Do you think the Bangladesh problem can be solved without a war?" she was asked.

"This has also been exercising my mind and the minds of the leaders I met," she answered.

Asked about reports in the foreign press that she and President Nixon had found "no common ground" in their talks, she said this was "not entirely correct." She did not elaborate.

PAKISTAN-CHINA MEETING

China's chief delegate to the United Nations, Chiao Kuan'hua, and his deputy, Huang Hua, today discussed the India'Pakistan dispute and United Nations matters for an hour and 30 minutes with Agha Shahi, the chief delegate of Pakistan to the UN. The Chinese delegates, according to The New York Times, discussed the situation in the light of the statement made by US Secretary of State William P Rogers in Washington yesterday. Rogers expressed fear that the border clashes might lead to all‐out war.

Pakistani officials had the belief that Peking's entry into the United Nations as a permanent member of the Security Council had greatly strengthened their country's position in the dispute with India.

EAST PAKISTAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE TOPPLED: BHUTTO

ZA Bhutto, leader of Pakistan People's Party, warned that if an attempt was made to form a government from the winners of by-elections to be held in East Pakistan next month, "we will topple it within 40 days." Bhutto was addressing a huge crowd in Karachi yesterday.

It was also reported that Pakistan President Yahya Khan assured Pakistan Democratic Party chief Nurul Amin of investigating the manner in which nominees of the Pakistan People's Party were declared elected unopposed in East Pakistan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In the Kushtia-Jashore-Khulna sector, Mukti Bahini ambushed today Pakistani troops in Rajapur area killing four and injuring two enemy soldiers. On the same day in an ambush in Pratappur area of Kushtia district, Mukti Bahini killed 11 enemy soldiers and injured four. Freedom fighters disrupted road communication between Chougacha-Jessore by destroying several culverts between these two places.

Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani position in Chaura area of Comilla district today killing two and injuring three enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
