Indira asks cabinet to give world last chance
2021-11-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-asks-cabinet-give-world-last-chance-2229116

November 14, 1971

WAIT A LITTLE MORE

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said that the international community ought to be given the chance to persuade President Yahya Khan to initiate, within the next week or so, a realistic political solution in East Pakistan. She was addressing the cabinet political affairs committee today, following her return from a protracted tour of the West.

While declaring that India had nothing to lose by waiting for a "little time", Indira said if international leaders fail to provide a solution, India would be justified in taking steps to resolve the crisis to safeguard her national security. She, however, was not optimistic that international initiatives would resolve the crisis.

Meanwhile, United News of India reported that three Pakistani jet fighters violated Indian air space today over the northern state of Kashmir.

On the other hand, the Pakistani radio asserted today that six Indian soldiers who were captured yesterday near Dharmadaha in the Kushtia district of East Pakistan admitted that regular Indian troops had been involved in attacks on East Pakistan's borders. Twenty-four Indian soldiers were killed in the clash with Pakistani soldiers near Dharmadaha, according to a military communiqué.

BRITISH SHIPPING OPERATIONS TO E PAKISTAN STOPPED

British shipping lines, for all practical purposes, suspended operations in East Pakistan as Chalna Port was closed for mine detection. Bangladesh activists made it clear to the jute market in London that they would not allow the Yahya regime to export jute and buy arms.

AN EAST PAKISTANI SHOULD BE PM: AMIN

President of Pakistan Democratic Party Nurul Amin demanded that an East Pakistani should be made prime minister of Pakistan. Speaking at the inauguration of the newly formed Pakistan front Nurul said this was essential to allay the suspicion and frustration among the people of East Pakistan and to promote national identity.

ON THE WAR FRONT

In Lalmonirhat, Mukti Bahini removed railway lines between Hatibandha and Parlia today disrupting the railway communication in the area.

In the Kushita-Jashore-Khulna sector, freedom fighters raided police camp at Andubaria in Chuadanga today and killed 12 West Pakistani policemen. On the same day, one vehicle carrying rations for Pakistani troops was blown up by Mukti Bahini in Kola area. Another group of Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani army vehicle near Satkhira today. In that action four enemy soldiers, including a captain, were killed.

In an ambush on Pakistani troops, Mukti Bahini killed six and wounded four enemy soldiers today in Rampur area of Kishoreganj. In Dhamsur area of Mymensingh, Mukti Bahini encountered enemy troops today and killed six Pakistani soldiers and nine Razakars.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
