Pakistani foreign secy calls on Kissinger
2021-11-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/pakistani-foreign-secy-calls-kissinger-2230076

November 15, 1971

KHAN-KISSINGER MEETING

Pakistan's Foreign Secretary Sultan Khan called on US President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger today.

The Pak Foreign Secretary informed that there would be a return to civilian rule at the end of December, at which time it might be easier to bring about such matters as the release of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

He, however, noted that feeling in the armed forces remained high against Mujib, so even a civilian government would have to weigh carefully any action taken in connection with Mujib. Kissinger said he personally felt that Mujib would "be devoured by the process" in Kolkata if he were released.

But as of now he was perceived by many to be central to a solution, Kissinger added. Kissinger continued saying that it would be extremely desirable for him to have an authoritative statement of President Yahya's view on the role of Mujib over the next six months.

On the same day, Kissinger, in a backchannel message to US Ambassador to Pakistan Farland said that Nixon did not want US pressure to be added to that of India, but did wish to be helpful to Yahya. Kissinger sought Farland's opinion about whether Yahya would agree to talk with anyone chosen by Mujib.

7-PARTY ALLIANCE FORMED

Seven right-wing political parties today agreed to forge parliamentary alliance, apparently in a bid for power when the government in Pakistan would be transferred to civilians in December. The United Coalition Party, as the alliance would be known, chose as its leader Nurul Amin, President of Pakistan Democratic Party.

SOVIET BIDS PAKISTAN REVIVE INDIA TIES

The Soviet Union today backed up reported shipments of arms to India with an appeal to Pakistan to seek the restoration of good‐neighbourly relations with India "in the interest of international security."

An article in the Soviet Government newspaper Izvestia charged that an anti‐Indian campaign was being fanned in Pakistan just when a favorable political atmosphere was needed to achieve a peaceful solution of the East Pakistani refugee problem.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops today at South Khetkibari, Rangpur killing three enemy soldiers and injuring one.

Mukti Bahini fired on Pakistani position at Chhagalnaiya in Noakhali district today. Five Pakistani soldiers were killed in the action.

Mukti Bahini in an encounter with the enemy killed seven irregulars and captured six Razakars from Kaliakoir, Dhaka.

Mukti Bahini fired with mortars on Pakistani troops position in Araipara area of Madaripur. In this action, three enemy soldiers were killed and three were wounded.

Another group of Mukti Bahini ambushed occupation troops moving in Jainagar area killing two and injuring three enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
