Bangladesh govt criticises proposal of political settlement
2021-11-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-govt-criticises-proposal-political-settlement-2231766

November 17, 1971

CURFEW IN DHAKA

A daylight curfew was imposed on Dhaka today, reported The New York Times. There were unconfirmed reports of fighting between soldiers and guerrillas in some of the city's suburbs. Second-hand sources said that the army had imposed the curfew to conduct a search of houses for guerrillas and weapons. The streets were empty except for military jeeps and trucks and a few escorted private and diplomatic cars, add the newspaper.

BANGLADESH GOVT'S REBUTTAL

Bangladesh Government strongly criticised today the fresh attempts made by some Western countries to float feelers hinting towards a political settlement between Awami League leaders and West Pakistan Military junta. The Government stated that the question of settlement with West Pakistan could only be pondered over when four pre-conditions enunciated by the Acting President Syed Nazrul Islam would be fulfilled: Recognition of Bangladesh as free and sovereign country; Withdrawal of Pakistan forces from Bangladesh; Unconditional release of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman; and Compensation for the loss inflicted on the people of Bangladesh due to army atrocities and for the disparity existing before 25th March, 1971.

The government statement concluded, "Gallant Mukti Bahini is replying to Yahya in the language of weapon as he started it on 25th of March, 1971 and they will continue to do so until total independence is achieved which is the declared policy of the Government of Bangladesh."

US PRIEST KILLED

The Daily Telegraph of London reported today that American Roman Catholic Priest Father William P Evans was shot dead on November 13, 1971 at Bukshnagar, 17 miles south-west of Dhaka. The boatman who used to take the priest from Gola to the Mission told Clare Hollingworth, the correspondent of the Daily Telegraph, "We were boating down the river when military guards ordered them to report to the local commanding officer as the boat was searched. Father Evans was questioned and allowed to return to the boat. But for some unknown reason they took Father and me out of the boat and forced us to sit in a ditch. Although the commanding officer was satisfied about the identity of Father Evans the army began firing at close range."

The Father was shot dead and his body thrown into the river.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Occupation troops attacked Mukti Bahini near Ulipur of Rangpur district today. Mukti Bahini repulsed it successfully. In his action 24 Pakistani troops were killed and ten were injured.

Mukti Bahini shelled Pakistani troops position in Chandla of Comilla district killing six enemy soldiers. They also destroyed 2 bunkers of the enemy.

Mukti Bahini attacked Pakistani troops at Bhomra today and killed 5 of the enemy.

Mukti Bahini encountered Pakistani troops in Badalpur area of Sunamganj today and killed 17 enemy soldiers. Mukti Bahini also captured two rifles during this operation.

Mukti Bahini raided Ishurdi police station and killed 11 West Pakistani Policemen. They recovered eight Rifles. They also destroyed telephone exchange and VIP guest house in the town.

The freedom fighters raided Fatikchhari Police Station and circle office today and captured 11 Policemen. They hoisted Bangladesh Flag on those government offices. During this raid freedom fighters captured large quantity of ammunitions.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
