Indira rejects Thant’s proposal
2021-11-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-rejects-thants-proposal-2232621

November 18, 1971

INDIRA'S REPLY TO THANT

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi turned down U Thant's proposal that he help relieve tensions between India and Pakistan. She urged him to concentrate instead on ending the "civil war" in East Pakistan.

In a 1,000-word letter to the United Nations secretary general on November 17, 1971, and presented in the Indian parliament today, Indira Gandhi accused the international community of trying to save the military regime of President Yahya Khan.

"The root of the problem is the fate of the 75 million people of East Bengal and their inalienable rights," Indira Gandhi wrote in response to identical letters Thant sent to her and President Yahya Khan on October 20.

"This is what must be kept in mind instead of the present attempt to save the military regime. To sidetrack this main problem and to convert it into an Indo-Pakistan dispute can only aggravate tensions."

Justifying India's massing of troops along her borders, Indira Gandhi charged that "Pakistan is seriously preparing to launch a large-scale armed conflict with India and we have to therefore take all necessary defence measures."

THREAT TO UN AID IN PAKISTAN

The head of the United Nations' relief operation in East Pakistan warned today that active opposition from "any quarter" would compel the aid programme to cease.

The warning, by Assistant Secretary General Paul Marc Henry, was known to reflect rising fears that the humanitarian activities directed by 85 United Nations officials were jeopardized by stepped up military activities, in particular by the Bangladeshi guerrilla forces. One relief ship flying the United Nations flag was blown up in Chittagong harbor and supply trucks had been attacked.

BRITAIN WANTS POLITICAL SETTLEMENT

Britain feels that there should be a political settlement of the Bangladesh problem and the responsibility for this laid on Pakistan. Stating that at a news conference in New Delhi today, the British Overseas Development Minister Sir Richard Wood said, "There should be a dialogue between President Yahya Khan and those who hold power in East Bengal."

ON THE WAR FRONT

Pakistani troops along with a group of Razakars advanced towards Agrapukur area in Rajshahi district. Mukti Bahini made a surprise attack on the enemy killing 10 Pakistani soldiers and a number of Razakars. In this action, one brave freedom fighter was killed and two others sustained minor injuries.

Mukti Bahini ambushed an enemy column today at Bakshiganj in Mymensingh district killing 17 and injuring nine enemy soldiers.

Mukti Bahini raided a mixed column of Pakistani troops and Razakars in Ramtala area in Cumilla-Noakhali sector killing three Pakistani soldiers and five Razakars.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
