Yahya declined to discuss with Mujib
2021-11-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/yahya-declined-discuss-mujib-2234076

November 20, 1971

KISSINGER'S MEMORANDUM

Henry Kissinger, US president's assistant for national security affairs, in a memorandum dated November 20, 1971, informed president Nixon that Yahya had expressed disinclination to permit Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to designate a Bangladesh representative who could speak on his own behalf and negotiate for the Bangladesh movement with the Pakistanis. On the other hand, Yahya's government would be happy to meet Bangladesh representatives under other conditions. Mujib, according to Yahya, was not the key to negotiations but rather Indira Gandhi held "both the key and the lock". Yahya shared this view during a recent meeting with Joseph Farland, US ambassador to Pakistan.

The memorandum further informed that Yahya sketched his scenario for a political settlement through promulgation of a constitution in mid-December, convening the National Assembly on December 27, 1971 and transfer of power "several weeks" thereafter. Then the new civilian government could, if it wished, deal with Mujib and Bangladesh.

Yahya reaffirmed his decision to avoid war if at all possible and said that he would not start war. He was thinking of a plan which would turn over completely to the UN the administration of camps for returning refugees, added the memorandum.

Farland had the impression that Yahya believes he is being boxed in by numerous pressures that are being exerted on him at home and abroad. For the first time he sensed "agitation" in Yahya. He thinks that Yahya had decided that his political plan is his only means of extricating himself from an untenable military and economic situation inflamed and fueled by India.

CHINA DENOUNCES INDIA IN UN

China accused India of interfering in Pakistan's internal affairs and of obstructing efforts to restore peace in the subcontinent. Fu Hao, a Chinese representative, in a statement that surprised diplomats by its toughness, charged that subversive activities by India in East Pakistan had caused refugees to flee across the border. The Chinese delegate did not mention India by name but spoke of a "certain country" in his statement in the General Assembly's Social Committee, which had been discussing humanitarian assistance to the Pakistani refugees.

China's support of Pakistan's political position and the attack on India were unexpected to some delegates, who had felt that Peking's relations with India had been improving and that there was some doubt that China would give open backing to Pakistan in the deepening border conflict.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini launched an attack on Raiganj base of Pakistan Army in Kurigram today. The Pakistan army launced a counterattack. Lt Samad provided cover fire so the Mukti Bahini soldiers could escape. He was martyred in the battle. The Bangladesh government conferred upon him the title -- "Bir Uttam".

Initially, freedom fighters failed to gain an upper hand against the Pakistani invaders. Later, they made a strong comeback, defeated the Pakistani army and freed Raiganj next day.

Mukti Bahini destroyed the newly-built railway bridge at Gochihata in Kishoreganj. A fierce battle broke out in the region.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected] .
