Joint command formed
2021-11-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/joint-command-formed-2234741

November 21, 1971

CHINA'S SPEECH NOT UNEXPECTED: INDIRA

China's relations with Pakistan and the reported speech of the Chinese delegate at the United Nations were not unexpected, Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi said today.

The speech of the Chinese representative Fu Hau at the world body wouldn't change India's stand and its relations with China, she added.

Asked to comment on the statement of Pakistan president Yahya that he desired to improve relations with India, Indira said India would welcome such a move provided the Pakistan president meant it sincerely.

Asked to clarify what she meant by "sincerity", Indira said the Pakistan government should immediately release Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and give up the farce of fresh elections in Bangladesh. They should recognise the elected public representatives and arrive at a political settlement with them in order to create the necessary atmosphere and guarantee of safe return of the refugees.

ON THE WAR FRONT

A joint command composed of the Indian Armed Forces and Bangladesh Mukti Bahini was formally formed today. Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora, commander, Eastern Command of Indian Army, became the commander of the joint forces.

Mukti Bahini and the 14th Punjab Regiment of the Indian Army moved in to capture the areas around Garibpur, Boyra. Pakistan immediately retaliated with an infantry battalion.

Retaining infantry and recoilless rifles in a defensive position, the Indian tanks were sent forward to ambush the oncoming Pakistani charge. A fierce battle ensued in the next couple of hours which resulted in heavy casualties on both sides. Eight Pakistani Chaffees were destroyed and three captured. An Indian Army tank led by Colonel TS Sidhu was destroyed by Pakistani fire, wounding him, and Major Daljit Singh Narang was killed.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
