Recognition ever-elusive for martyred Harijans
2021-11-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Dipan Nandy
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/recognition-ever-elusive-martyred-harijans-2235771

Today is November 22. On this day in 1971, 10 members of the Harijan community were picked up and killed by the Pakistan forces.

Their crime? Aiding freedom fighters.

They all lived in the Mirin Jilla Harijan City Colony in the capital's Aga Sadek Lane. But despite their valiant efforts and eventual tragedy, they're yet to get recognised as freedom fighters 50 years on. Instead, losing the prime bread-earners, their families have lived this half-a-century mired in misfortune.

During the Liberation War, locals of the Harijan colony helped out freedom fighters in whatever way they could, up to varying degrees of danger. From supplying food to even carrying arms inside brooms.

But as news of this got to the aggressors' camp, on November 21 midnight, the Pakistan forces picked up 10 Harijans. They could never be traced again.

They are: Mahabir Lal Samund, Nandu Lal, Anowar Lal, Ishwar Lal, Khalbal Das, Ghashita Das, Sankar Das Hela, Nanda Lal, Lalu Das, and Ramcharan.

As homage to them, Harijan Sevak Samity has built a memorial inside the colony. On November 22 every year, relatives of the martyrs, along with residents of the colony, gather there to lay down floral tributes and host remembrance programmes.

Visiting the area yesterday, this correspondent saw preparations were ongoing in full-swing ahead of today's programmes. The memorial plaque had been cleaned, while a banner was hung at the main gate of the Mirin Jilla Government Primary School. It reads "May the Martyr's Day Live Forever".

At the colony area, this correspondent spoke to Anowar Lal's wife Benodebi. Even after all this time, she gets all teared up thinking of that fateful night 50 years ago.

"I still get shivers. We had already gone to sleep with our two daughters and son. In the middle of the night, there were knocks on the door. It scared us stiff," said a grief-stricken Benodebi.

"As soon as he [Anowar Lal] opened the door, the Pakistan army picked him up in the face of firearms. We never saw him again."

Reminiscing her husband's role during the Liberation War, she said, "We used to see him come home with bread, banana, flattened rice, and molasses. But he'd then hide them. If I asked, he'd tell me not to think about it. We later got to know he used to bring the food home for the freedom fighters."

"Ever since his passing, I had been living a life befitting of a nightmare. I managed to get a job at Bangladesh Biman as his wife, but I'm retired now. It's been 50 years, but we're yet to get any recognition, other than 'The Daily Star Unsung Heroes of Bangladesh Liberation War 1971' award in July 2013. But there's been no formal acknowledgment from the government," she lamented.

Like Benodebi, members of the other nine martyrs' families are also spending their days in deep distress.

Talking to this newspaper, Harijan Sevak Samity senior vice-president Nirmal Chandra Das said, "To be honest, we couldn't even speak in the early days after the liberation. Some time later, we started contacting different quarters over the recognition of our martyrs."

"Recently, we brought over Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque as a guest at one of our programmes and told him of our demands. But recognition still remains ever-elusive. If we could get it, at least the family members could get some allowances or jobs. But nothing of the sort has happened."

This year, the community isn't planning to hold any elaborate events. "Renovation work is going on at roads around the colony, which is why we aren't inviting guests. We'll just hold a remembrance programme among ourselves. There'll be floral tributes, special prayers. We'll also be cooking food for residents of the colony," Nirmal said.
