Kissinger’s plan for isolating India
2021-11-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/kissingers-plan-isolating-india-2235501

November 22, 197

US RESPONSE TO INDIAN OFFENSIVE

Henry Kissinger, the US President's assistant for National Security Affairs, called the US President Nixon today at 12:45pm and said, "There is no doubt there is a large encroachment taking place and it is heavily backed by the Indians." In a memo later that day, Kissinger relayed Pakistani radio broadcasts of an Indian offensive and added, "We have no independent evidence but it seems apparent that there has been a major incident."

Kissinger still hoped that war could be averted, despite the "naked case of Indian aggression", but the threshold had been crossed. As an overall strategy, Kissinger endorsed the idea of coordinated action with China in the UN Security Council. Kissinger suggested, "We ought to talk to the Chinese to find out what they'll do at the Security Council…We don't have to go as far as the Chinese, but I would lean..." Nixon interrupted, "I want to go damn near as far. Now, understand, I don't like the Indians." Nixon repeated his theme, "Let's remember the Pakistanis have been our friends…and the damn Indians have not been." Kissinger hoped to coordinate with the Chinese and other powers in order to diplomatically isolate India and its Soviet Bloc supporters.

YAHYA VISITS BORDER AREA

Pakistan President Yahya Khan today visited border areas in the Sialkot sector. He was accompanied by the Pakistan Army Chief General Abdul Hamid Khan, according to Pakistan Radio. Yahya was "happy" to find the soldiers in high spirits, the Radio said.

ON THE WAR FRONT

The occupation troops attacked the Mukti Bahini position at Ghughudanga of Dinajpur today. After a fierce battle the Pakistani troops withdrew and 30 enemy soldiers were killed. Two  brave freedom fighters were killed in the action while two others sustained injuries.

Freedom fighters destroyed the Pakistani army post at Mandra and two strategically important road bridges between Satkhira town and Mahmudpur today. On the same day, one Pakistani army Jeep proceeding to Satkhira from

Jashore  was attacked by the Mukti Bahini on the Jashore-Satkhira  road. In this

action, three enemy soldiers, including one captain, were killed and the Jeep was

destroyed. Satkhira town was now isolated from Khulna.

India and Pakistan both used air attacks on this day's battle at Boyra. Pakistan lost three Sabre fighter jets, 13 tanks and several troops. Radio Pakistan claimed that Pakistani planes destroyed two Indian Gnats.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher.  He can be contacted at [email protected]
