Many faces of war
2012-04-03T00:00:00+06:00 | Jamil Mahmud
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-228723

A muktijoddha (Freedom Fighter) assisting refugees on their return home. 1971. Photo: Bal Krishnan/drik/majority World

If pictures alone could portray the nine-month long Liberation War, just how many pictures would it take? How many photographs could possibly be taken during those times? A photograph's limitation is that an image can only portray fraction of a second, while the privilege is that a fraction of a second can turn into a history defining moment.

Featuring 57 invaluable photographs covering the Liberation War, a group exhibition titled “Many Faces of War 1971” was held at an open space [behind the Shikha Chirantan] inside Suhrawardy Udyan. The exhibition was inaugurated on March 26.

The exhibition had been organised by Drik Picture Library in association with the Government of Bangladesh. Photographers Shahidul Alam and Robert Pledge are the curators of the exhibition.

The moments of 1971 War were documented almost entirely by local photographers. In his note, Shahidul Alam stated that the international media was not interested to cover the war initially. Yet there were several foreign photojournalists in Bangladesh in 1971, who, through their cameras captured the momentous moments.

On display are works of 17 local and international master photographers including Rashid Talukder, Naibuddin Ahmed, Jalaluddin Haider, Mohammad Shafi, Abdul Hamid Raihan, Kishor Parekh, Bal Krishnan, Raghu Rai, Raymond Depardon, David Burnett, Bruno Barbey and Don McCullin.

1971 is not just a number to a Bangladeshi; it embodies ultimate sacrifices for freedom, dignity that was upheld through pain and brutality and obviously the elation of victory.

It's a collection of pictures that's been used extensively in the media. Though some of the images have been rarely seen before.

Bal Krishnan's photo of a freedom fighter who assisted refugees on their return home is truly reflective of a thousand words. Don McCullin's photos trigger horrific memories of the refugee camps where cholera broke out after the monsoon in August 1971. One of Mohammad Shaif's photos, showing two young girls smuggling grenades in a basket covered with water hyacinth, is awe inspiring.

Several of Rashid Talukder's familiar photos are on display. They include one that depicts a street child leading a procession during the mass upsurge in 1969 and the one that features a mutilated head, in the erstwhile Rayer Bazar brickfield where the monument for the martyred intellectuals was later built.

One of Naibuddin Ahmed photos shows the battlefield in Haluaghat where Bengali and Indian soldiers fought side by side against the Pakistanis.

Magnum photographer Raghu Rai's signature work, framing the faces of elderly people, embodies their agony across every inch of the celluloid.

Kishor Parekh's portrayal of the faces of freedom fighters, abused women and others does not fail to evoke painful memories of the war.

The exhibition ended on March 31.
