93-yr-old freedom fighter struggles for existence
2013-12-13T00:00:00+06:00 | S Dilip Roy, Lalmonirhat
https://www.thedailystar.net/93-yr-old-freedom-fighter-struggles-for-existence-2300

Freedom fighter Nasim Uddin, now 93, who risked his life to save his fellow countrymen from the Pakistani occupation forces during the Liberation War in 1971, is now fighting for life without treatment and nutrition at his hut at Mogholhat village in Lalmonirhat Sadar upazila. Nasim’s wife Rabeya Begum said, “My husband could not take anything except liquid items for the last 20 days. But I could not afford to purchase any juicy food except 250 litres of cow milk daily for him. A week ago, a village doctor prescribed some medicines for him but I could not buy it due to lack of money.” “I don’t know what I will eat tomorrow. I fought for independence and democracy and my country achieved it. But it seems these are not for me. Still I have dream. I have no fear of losing anything,” a tearful Nasim Uddin, said as this correspondent visited him on Friday. Nasim fought for the country’s freedom during the Liberation War and saved many people, especially girls, from Pakistani soldiers, local people said. He collected information and drew maps showing movement of Pakistani soldiers and their camps which helped the local commander in making plans to conduct operations against the occupation forces, said Nasim Uddin’s co-fighters Amol Chandra, Sharat Chandra, Amzad Hossain, Nur Uddin and Haque Miah. “I fought against Pakistani forces in Sector 6 under the command of the then Wing Commander AKM Bashar,” Nasim Uddin Miah said wistfully. “My co-fighters receive benefits from the government, but my name is not included in the list of freedom fighters although I submitted eleven applications since 2004, the latest on June 10 this year to the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs, with the recommendation of the local commanders but I am yet to get any response,” he said. At the age of 93, knowing he doesn’t have too many years left to live, he wishes to receive recognition from the government before passing away. The war veteran, who is passing the twilight of his life with his wife Rabeya Begum, 68, and their physically challenged son Naymul Islam, 44, at Mogholhat village.
