Museum that heralds the history of a movement
2008-02-13T00:00:00+06:00 | Shahnaz Parveen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-23133

Photo: STAR

Despite limitations and lack of support from the government, the Bhasha Andolan Museum, established to preserve the memories of the historic Language Movement of 1952, carries on its efforts to enlighten the younger generation about the glorious past of the nation.

Started with small collections in 1989, the museum on Dhanmondi road-10 has some rare evidence of the historical episode that include photographs, documents, paper clippings, memorabilia of the martyrs and those who fought for the mother tongue.

"State is the responsible party to uphold the history of a nation. Since they did not come forward with any effort even after 55 years of the language movement, someone has to take the initiative," said MR Mahbub, director of the museum.

"A museum on our Bhasha Andolan [Language Movement] is necessary for the new generation to learn more about the language movement. We only remember the episode when February comes. We have to do more than that," he noted.

"The history is gradually fading away. The Bhasha Shoiniks [Language Movement veterans] who could tell the next generation about our glorious past, will no longer be with us. We have already lost many of them. So we must bring together their memories and the important evidence of the movement," said Mahbub.

The museum has separate sections on research, exhibition, documentation, computer and film, publications and library, and administration, operated by enthusiastic volunteers.

Currently the museum has in its display the memorabilia, portraits and biographies of 30 Language Movement veterans, political leaders, student leaders and intellectuals who have made an immense contribution to our the movement.

The same volunteers have been collecting the valuable items for the last 17 years.

Original copies of newspapers including Saptahik Shoinik, which was considered the voice of the movement at that time, pamphlets and manuscripts are on display.

The research centre comprises a library with a large number of books, archives, documentaries, diaries and written documents of the Language Movement.

The museum so far published 10 books related to the movement. A 2500-page encyclopaedia on the Language Movement is now in the final stage of publication.

The museum also made a documentary film with rare interviews of 20 Language Movement veterans who have already passed away.

Photographs donated by Mohammad Taqiullah, Mohammad Amanul Haque and Professor Rafiqul Islam are on display, portraying the movement from 1948 to 1952.
