Ekushey February
2015-02-17T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/spotlight/ekushey-february-2367

Bangla the language I speak the comfort I seek that gives me a sense of belonging, a culture so grand rich traditions of the land for which my heart feels longing.

Its songs and poetry endless in bounty leave me yearning for more, passion and emotion like a love potion which seems forever to pour. Young men promised their lives for language and pride with courage came out to declare, they could not accept loss of esteem and respect and give in to what was unfair.

Shot on the streets as they stood on their feet young blood flowing in a stream, to establish their right they kept up the fight so we now live their dream.

I dedicate my lines to the martyrs of time who shed blood to save the day, a standing ovation from all of our nation please rise in respect, if you may. By Yasmin Zaman Ali

***

63 years ago, our country lost some of its brightest and bravest sons in an act of injustice. They were common students like you and I, but their sacrifice is greater than any of us. It was their hands that moulded our country into what it is today. 21st February is a day when we celebrate our very own language. It's a day to relish how each word feels on our lips. It's a day to proudly sing under the flag and feel the goosebumps on our arms with each rising note. Ekushey founded the roots to the struggle for our independence. Our rebellion is not just an entry for our history books. It is a struggle that lives on to this day. Our country is perhaps going through its most difficult era after a decade of peace. The violence that we have been forced to endure these past few months has taken a toll on each of us. It has made us question our loyalty several times. So perhaps we should take a moment's pause and appreciate our history and culture. If there is one thing we excel at it's never losing hope. We have held together at the toughest of times. We have fought against tyrants who wanted to cut out our tongues. We have singlehandedly fought the Pakistani army and carved out a nation for ourselves. We must honour their memory and walk on till the end. We must persevere like our heroic ancestors.

By Daneesha Khan Photo: Shahrear Kabir Heemel Model: Hridi and Farhan Wardrobe: LS Desk
