Nation observes new-dimension Martyred Intellectuals’ Day
2013-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/nation-observes-new-dimension-martyred-intellectuals-day-2433

The nation is observing Martyred Intellectuals Day with a different dimension this year as a war criminal was hanged just only two days ago.

Jamaat assistant secretary general Abdul Quader Mollah, known as ‘Koshai Quader’ was hanged on Thursday for his brutal style of torture during the Liberation War in 1971.

On this day in 1971, just two days before the country earned its victory, Pakistani occupation forces and their local collaborators killed the great sons of the soil with an evil motive to make the Bengali nation meritless.

The day’s programme began with the president and prime minister placing wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals’ Memorial in Mirpur of the capital.

Later, people from all walks of life paid their pride-filled respects to the memorial in the morning.

UNB adds:  President Abdul Hamid paid glowing tributes to the martyred intellectuals by placing wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals Mausoleum at Mirpur on the occasion of Martyred Intellectuals Day.

The president placed the wreaths at 6:50am to show his homage to the great heroes, who sacrificed their lives for the cause of the country and the nation.

The president stood in solemn silence there for some time as the bugle played the last post.

Abdul Hamid also talked to the war-wounded freedom fighters and family members of the martyred intellectuals there and enquired about their wellbeing.

Earlier, on his arrival at the mausoleum site, President Abdul Hamid was received by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and Shipping and Liberation War Affairs Minister Shajahan Khan.

The prime minister paid rich tributes to the intellectuals of the country, who were brutally killed by local collaborators with the help of the Pakistani occupation forces on this day back in 1971, only two days ahead of the nation’s Victory Day.

The PM placed wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial at Mirpur around 7:00am and stood in solemn silence for some time to show respect to the memories of the martyred intellectuals when bugle was played last post.

Accompanied by the party central leaders, Sheikh Hasina, also president of Bangladesh Awami League, laid another wreath at the memorial as the party chief.

The premier exchanged pleasantries with war-maimed freedom fighters on the memorial premises and enquired about their wellbeing.

Later, at about 7:30am, the PM placed wreath at the portrait of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at Bangabandhu Memorial Museum at Dhanmondi in the city marking the Martyred Intellectuals Day.

Ministers, PM’s advisers, senior Awami League leaders, senior officials and leaders of the front organisations of the party were present.
