Woman narrates killing of her husband in '71
2014-05-23T00:00:37+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/woman-narrates-killing-of-her-husband-in-71-25318

A martyr's wife yesterday testified that Pakistani army had killed her husband and one of his friends after Jamaat-e-Islami leader Abdus Subhan had identified them in Pabna during the Liberation War. “My husband and Shamsul Haque [her husband's friend] were shot dead before my eyes,” Jahanara Begum, wife of martyr freedom fighter Rajab Ali Biswas, told the International Crimes Tribunal-2. “I pleaded for my husband's life touching Moulana Subhan's feet, but he kicked me off. The Pakistani army first shot my husband and then Shamsul Haque,” said a sobbing Jahanara, who is the seventh prosecution witness in the war crimes case against Subhan. The Pakistani army had killed at least six people in their village, after Subhan had showed them, and burned down 10 to 15 houses on May 2, 1971, said the 65-year-old witness. “I have been demanding justice since the murder and today I am seeking justice,” said Jahanara as she identified Subhan. She said she had known the accused since the 1970's general elections. The Jamaat nayeb-e-ameer faces nine charges including genocide committed in Pabna during the nine-month-long war and pleads not guilty before the court. During her 50-minute testimony, Jahanara of Sahapur village under Ishwardi upazila said her husband was a leader of Awami League and Swadhinata Sangram Parishad, a pro-liberation platform, in 1971. “I used to keep the arms of freedom fighters and cook for them during the Liberation War,” she told the court. The witness said Subhan along with the Pakistani army had entered their Sahapur village spraying bullets in the morning of May 2, 1971. She added they heard gunshots around 7:00am and the news that the house of Tayabur Rahman, the then principal of Ishwardi College, had been burned down. They including her husband, her parents-in-law and Shamsul Haque hid in a bamboo orchard behind their house, she said. “But Moulana Subhan and the Pakistani army besieged us. As the army attempted to shoot my husband after Moulana Subhan had introduced him to them, I pleaded for his life touching Subhan's feet, but he kicked me off,” said emotion-chocked Jahanara. The Pakistani army first shot her husband and then Shamsul, she added. Jahanara said she had also heard the Pakistani army had killed their neighbours Rahim Sarder and Mahmud Sarder and villagers Chand Ali Pramanik, Akhter Pramanik, Anar Pramanik and Haresuddin after Subhan had identified them that day. She said her brothers had taken her husband's body to her father's house and buried him there. Subhan's lawyer Shahjahan Kabir asked three questions before the three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan with members Justice Md Mozibur Rahman Miah and Justice Md Shahinur Islam adjourned the proceedings until Sunday. CONTEMPT PETITION AGAINST KALER KANTHO The International Crimes Tribunal-1 has meanwhile adjourned until May 28 hearing of a contempt petition filed against a reporter, the editor and publisher of bangle daily Kaler Kantho by the prosecution for a report headlined “Odokkho prosecutioner kormokando druto bichar shesh korte badha [unskilled prosecution hinder speedy trial]” published on May 11, 2014. Prosecutor Mohammad Ali told the tribunal that the report 'maligned' him and created 'obstruction' to the proceedings of the trial. Asked by the tribunal to explain, he said both the prosecution and the defence were officers of the court, adding, since the report had 'maligned' him, it had also harmed the tribunal's reputation. The tribunal suggested that it would be wise if any other prosecutor had taken part in the hearing since the report was on Ali's activities. Ali told the tribunal that senior prosecutor Syed Haider Ali was supposed to place arguments on his behalf but suddenly fell sick. He sought time for argument by Haider Ali and the tribunal fixed the date and said it would pass an order that day.
