Families of martyred intellectuals want immediate execution
2013-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/families-of-martyred-intellectuals-want-immediate-execution-2551

Paying tribute to their loved ones on Martyred Intellectuals’ Day, families of the illustrious citizens yesterday called for immediate execution of verdicts passed by the International Crimes Tribunals. Martyred intellectual Dr Alim Chowdhury’s daughter Dr Nuzhat Chowdhury said Thursday’s execution of a war criminal for the first time in Bangladesh proved that the sacrifice had not gone to waste. “Today is not only a day of mourning but of resilience. People, especially the young generation, made it possible,” she told a discussion Bangladesh National Museum organised on its premises in the capital. Prof Emeritus Anisuzzaman, as chief guest, said the stigma has been ameliorated somewhat through the execution. “But there is still a long way to go to achieve the Liberation War’s promise of a golden Bangladesh. We have to unite for this,” he said. Actress Shomi Kaiser, daughter of writer-novelist Shahidullah Kaiser, at Rayerbazar Martyred Intellectuals’ Graveyard, said the pre-planned killing of intellectuals aimed at destroying the nation before its birth. Journalist Zahid Reza Noor, son of martyred journalist Serajuddin Hossain, said the execution of Abdul Quader Mollah had opened a new era. Meanwhile, socio-cultural and political organisations paid their respects at the Rayer Bazar graveyard and Martyred Intellectuals’ Memorial at Mirpur with bouquets and wreaths and organised discussions and cultural events in the capital. They also hailed Quader Mollah’s execution and demanded the same for the other verdicts, says press releases. National Garment Workers Federation, and Bangladesh Shishu Academy paid tribute at the Mirpur memorial and the latter organised a prize-giving ceremony of a children’s painting competition, held on Friday, on its premises. Swadhinata Chikitshak Parishad arranged a discussion at Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University while Bangabandhu Sangskritik Jote paid tribute at “Shikha Chironton” (eternal flame) inside Suhrawardy Udyan and held a discussion on its premises. In a statement, Communist Party of Bangladesh urged for trying other war criminals while Bangladesh Awami Shamabay League brought out a procession in Dhanmondi’s Russel Square.
