Razakars tortured father on Subhan's order
2014-05-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/razakars-tortured-father-on-subhans-order-25724

A victim's son yesterday testified against war crimes accused Jamaat Nayeb-e-Ameer Abdus Subhan, saying that he along with Razakars and Biharies picked up his father and an Ansar man, who were later tortured to lifelong physical impairments at a Razakar camp in Pabna on Subhan's order during the Liberation War. Ashraf Uddin Miah, the eighth prosecution witness in Subhan's case, said although his father and another detainee were released later following Subhan's order, they became crippled due to the torture. Biharies, who were accompanied by the accused, also looted their houses and burnt down one of them, Ashraf told the International Crimes Tribunal-2. Subhan is facing nine charges including genocide committed in Pabna during the war. Subhan, however, pleaded not guilty before the court. During his 49-minute testimony, Ashraf, son of Alauddin Miah, an Ansar member of Arunkhola village at Iswardi in Pabna, said in the middle of Bangla month Baishakh, Subhan along with Pakistani army and Biharies had come to their home in search of his father. “As they did not find my father, Biharies looted belongings of our house and set fire to a straw-house,” said Ashraf. Then Subhan and his cohorts went to Joyenuddin's home, who was also an Ansar member, and looted his house, as they did not find him there, he said. “Under the leadership of Moulana Subhan, Pakistani army and Biharies looted and torched the houses of the Hindu-dominated area in our village,” he added. On the first day of Bangla month Jaishtha, Subhan, Khoda Baks (Khudu Kha) and 15/20 Razakars besieged a tea stall at Arunkhola Haat, picked up his father and Joyenddin, and taken them to Iswardi Rest House, a camp of Razakar and Pakistani army, said Ashraf. “I was present there [Arunkhola Haat],” he added. Following the advice of local dignitaries and one Kasim Uddin, Ashraf and his uncle Jalal Uddin and family members of Joyenuddin met Khudu Kha to have the duo released, but Khudu Kha asked them to meet Subhan for their release, said Ashraf. Ashraf said when Jalal and one of his relatives met Subhan, he ordered Khudu Kha over the telephone to release them and Khudu took him and other family members to the rest house and they found his father and Joyenuddin there. “We found them blood-stained and their physical conditions were so weak that they couldn't walk. We brought them home on a stretcher,” he added. “Following the quires of locals, my father told that Razakars tortured them at the rest house in the presence and at the instruction of Subhan Moulana and Khudu Kha,” said emotion-choked Ashraf, adding that although both of them had taken treatment, they became physically crippled. After his testimony, the three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan adjourned the case proceeding until today when Ashraf will face cross-examination.
