Celebrations of triumph 1971
2013-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/celebrations-of-triumph-1971-2578

Victory Day is one of the biggest national celebrations across the country, and despite the ongoing political turmoil, a lot of programmes are scheduled for the day, including some unique attempts.

One of the most elaborate programmes of the day is being chalked out by the Gonojagoron Mancha. Titled “Bijoy 2013”, a wide array of programmes will be held at the historic Suhrawardy Udyan. Starting at 11:15am, noted artistes and groups will perform at the stage, followed by a ‘Concert for Freedom’ beginning at 2:30pm. After a cultural presentation by the Sector Commanders’ Forum at 3:45pm, a ‘documentary act’ on the surrender of the Pakistan army will be held at 4:10pm, followed by a choral singing of the National Anthem at 4:31pm, the exact time of surrender by the Pak army in 1971. A token oath-taking and flag handover to the second-in-command of the Liberation War Air Vice Marshall (retd) AK Khandaker and a performance by artistes of Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendro, a fireworks display is scheduled for 5:20pm, after which the concert will resume.

At the National Parade Ground, Telecom Company Robi Axiata Limited is attempting to break a World Record by making the largest human flag in the world, titled “Laal Shobuj’er Bishwa Joy”. A staggering number of 30,000 people are expected to take part in holding up the largest human flag ever made. The event will begin at 10am and is scheduled till 2pm.

Channel i is also holding a daylong Channel i Bijoy Mela at its office at Tejgaon today. Freedom Fighters, cultural and literary personalities along with editors of the national dailies will be present at the inaugural session. As part of the Bijoy Mela, artists will take part in a painting programme. The event will include songs, recitations, plays, interviews and reminiscences on the war. There will also be several documentary screenings, and photography exhibitions on the Liberation War. Senior programme manager Amirul Islam and Shahidul Islam Sachchu will direct the event.

Apart from that, Sammilita Sangskritik Jote will continue their scheduled cultural programmes at 12 venues in and around the capital, in Gendaria, Bahadur Shah Park, Hajaribagh, Motijheel, Shaheed Minar, Dhaka University premises, Dhanmondi Rabindra Sharobor, Rayerbazar memorial, Uttara, Dania, Pallabiand Mirpur.

As part of the Liberation War Museum’s programmes, it will hold a children’s cultural programme featuring various cultural organisations and schools at its premises from 10am, while a separate programme at Mirpur’s ‘Jolladkhana’ memorial will feature cultural performances by various groups.

The National museum’s two-day Liberation War-based Film Festival will also see its final day from 2pm, screening films “Stop Genocide”, “Not a Penny, Not a Gun” and “The Birth Pangs of a Nation”.

Udichi Shilpi Goshthi has also chalked out three-day programmes on the occasion. Today’s programmes will feature a children’s painting competition at 3pm at the Hakim Chattar of Dhaka University, a rally, book fair, photography exhibition, cultural programme and film show.

Dhaka University Film Society’s Victory Day celebrations will include a wall painting session at TSC at 6:30pm, followed by a film screening. BUET is also organising a daylong fair and photography exhibition, followed by a cultural programme and an orchestral performance in the evening.
