Bijoy-e Parbon-e
2012-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-261174

Freedom fighters inaugurate the festival.

Marking 41st Victory Day, a three daylong festival will kick off today (December 15) at Dhaka University Central Playground. Utshe, Bangladesh, a newly formed organisation, has arranged the innovative festival titled, "Bijoy-e Parbon-e".

Chairperson of "Bijoy-e Parbon-e" Festival Celebration Council and Vice Chancellor of Dhaka University, AAMS Arefin Siddique, inaugurated the festival on December 7 at the venue. Immortalising our victory year "1971", 1971 students serenaded our national anthem "Amar Sonar Bangla, Ami Tomaye Bhalobashi" while 16 titled (Bir Uttam, Bir Bikram and Bir Pratik) Freedom Fighters handed over national flags to 16 youngsters of this generation expecting that the legacy of pride that they achieved should be carried with determination and promise. The 16 Freedom Fighters aptly signified our victory day "16".

Paying reverence to 30 lakh martyred, including seven Bir Shreshtha, a "Bijoy Deep" (victory lamp) was lighted at the venue. The bamboo made 41 feet long victory lamp marked 41st Victory Day celebration. The organisers set 16 phanush free in the evening air on the day while the day's event was wrapped up with the melody of flute by noted artiste Bari Siddiqui.

Why inauguration of "Bijoy-e Parbon-e" was on December 7? The date "7" played important roles in many Bengali national movements. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman declared historic six-point charter on June 7, 1966; the historic 1970 election was held on December 7 and the Father of the Nation delivered a historic speech on March 7 in 1971. That's why the organisers inaugurated the festival on December 7.

Through holding "Bijoy Anno Utshab" (victory food festival) today's festival will begin at 10 am. The three daylong festival will feature "Bijoy Kathon" or victory tales at 11 am every day. Valiant Freedom Fighters will share their experiences of the Liberation War. Major (retd) Kamrul Hasan Bhuiyan and renowned educationist Muhammad Zafar Iqbal will emcee the event everyday.

To commemorate 41 years of victory, a "Bijoy Badya" (victory trumpet) showcasing 41 dhak-dhol will circle several streets of the capital at 8 am on Victory Day. The organisers will distribute a thousand bamboo flutes among the children at 10 am on the day. Freedom fighter and flautist Gazi Abdul Hakim will make the children learn playing flute. The initiative has been named as "Bijoy Banshi". Painting competition by the children will follow.

Programme of December 17 will start at 10 am. The day's festival will set off with making of several large Bhapapitha and Patishapta Pitha (cakes) and sharing among the audience.

The festival has been titled as "Bijoy-e Parbon-e" because the scheduled time frame of the festival captures Nabanno Utshab (new rice festival), our glorious victory festival and Poush Parbon (traditional winter cake festival).

Apart from daylong performances of Bhawaiya, Bhatiali, Lalangeeti and Khyapa Kirtan at Lokoj Mancha (folk stage), every day's cultural programme will start at 6 pm at the main stage. Noted artistes of the country will perform songs at the festival.

The three-day programmes will also showcase lathi khela, ha-doo-doo khela, kabi gaan, pat-er gaan, jari gaan, nagordola, puppet show, gambhira song, snake charmer's show, cock fight, bioscope, monkey dance, jatra, film screening on Liberation War and artworks display by Ferdousi Priyabhashini.

A vibrant adda depicting potentialities of Bangladesh will also be held everyday. The successful personalities from deferent fields of Bangladesh will take part in the adda. Book stall displaying covers on Liberation War will be placed at the venue. There will be an expatriate corner from where Bangladeshis living across the world will have the opportunities of video conferencing to the festival venue.

A three dimensional map of Bangladesh will be anchored in a plate measuring sixty feet radius where divisional delicacies, sectors with the commanders of Liberation War and division based pitha (cake) will be displayed respectively everyday. The festival will come to an end through releasing phanush in the evening air on December 17.
