Khulna was freed on this day
2012-12-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Khulna
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-261482

The Martyrs' Memorial in Khulna city's Gallamari area, built in memory of the freedom fighters and their family members who were brought here and killed by the Pakistani occupation forces and their local collaborators -- the Razakar, Al-Badar and Al-Shams -- during the 1971 Liberation War.Photo: STAR

December 17 is a red letter day for Khulna dwellers as on this day in 1971 the Pakistani occupation forces surrendered to the allied forces of Bangladeshi freedom fighters and Indian forces in Khulna, a day after the rest of the country.

“News over the radio on December 16 that the Pakistani army had surrendered everywhere except Khulna made our blood boil. We were determined to free Khulna as soon as possible,” said Sheikh Quamruzzaman Tuku, chief of Khulna unit Mujib Bahini.

Between December 11 and 16, freedom fighters had captured most of the camps of the Pakistani army and their local collaborators like the Razakars, Al-Badar and Al-Shams in the areas surrounding Khulna city.

The camps include Gallamari Radio Station, Khulna Lion's School, PMG Colony, Khulna Shipyard, Number 7 Jetty Ghat area, Tootpara and Boyra Fire Brigade Station, Wapda Building, Goalpara Power Plant at Khalishpur and some places of Goalkhali and Daulatpur area.

On December 17, the freedom fighters started entering Khulna city through different points including Rupsha Ghat area via Senerbazar-Razapur, Crescent Jute Mill area, Kulutia area, Khulna Lion's School area, Mongla area and Batiaghata area.

Two major battles were won on this day -- one in Shiromony area and another in Khulna Shipyard area.

The Pakistani forces were fighting for the last two days, armed with several regiments of artillery, infantry and armoured divisions, including six tanks, in Shiromony area.

In the morning, the battle grew fierce, says freedom fighter SM Rezwan. The occupation forces used modern weapons, including anti-aircraft machine guns, mortars and rocket launchers.

Soon the Pakistani occupation forces were defeated. A total of 200 Pakistani soldiers surrendered with their weapons while their local collaborators fled.

In the Khulna Shipyard area, the Pakistani forces ambushed a launch carrying freedom fighters along the Rupsha River. The liberation forces won but one freedom fighter had embraced martyrdom while 16 others were injured.

The freedom fighters marched to Khulna Circuit House grounds where the flag of an independent Bangladesh was raised around 10:30am by Major (Retd) Joynul Abedin and Gazi Rahmatulla Dadu.

Another flag was hoisted in Shaheed Hadis Park by freedom fighters.

Sector 9 Commander MA Jalil handed over several hundred prisoners of war, including their commander Brig Hayat Ali Khan, to General Dalbir Singh, chief of the Indian forces in the western region, in Khalishpur.

Hundreds of people of the newborn Bangladesh rushed out on to the streets at the end of the nine-month-long Liberation War chanting one slogan, “Joy Bangla”.
