Surrender
2014-06-03T00:00:18+06:00 | By Iffat Nawaz
https://www.thedailystar.net/surrender-26606

This is true. I have finally realised this. This yearly affair with Monsoon is not going too well. Half the year I spend waiting for a far away spring, one quarter goes in anticipation of the “any-day-now” wish-wash and the quarter that monsoon is with me, he is so consuming that all my long locked words ready to flow get stuck, some take absinth instantly with the sadness of never being born. It is my fault really. I gave him that privilege. I showed so much gratitude towards his existence, have been writing lines on paper and on my mind for decades now. He has seen my devotion, he has seen my love. He has taken me for granted, as he should. “It was not always like that,” he would say. I would say “maybe only for a few moments when you went through your embarrassing dry spells.” I am not angry, just heartbroken, the way it feels when you knew this moment was long coming. “What about my messages throughout the year?” Monsoon asked me eventually. “What messages?” I said faintly but with passion. “In the songs you heard? In the books you read?” he demanded. “It was my choice to read those. I chose those songs because I wanted to hear you. I wanted to read those books because I wanted to know you more.” I would say with strength, forgetting the act of coyness and modesty. Forgetting all that Monsoon gave me year after year. He was quiet. Clearly he did not like my response. His quietness made me nervous. I was not sure if that meant another flood of dry monsoon at my door or if it meant retreat forever, I had given up the expectation of him pouring bliss on me. Was he going to point a finger towards my own door now and tell me to leave my own house? My own country? He had the temper to. To move the conversation forward I cleared my throat and said, “You know in one of those popular-to-most-tastes Woody Alan movies one of my favourite dysfunctional male characters once said ‘…only unfulfilled love can be romantic.’” I paused to see Monsoon's reactions. The ever changing face of his, water dripping, dropping, different patterns, different shades. “I am not a romantic,” Monsoon declared in a November cold voice. “Are you kidding me? You? The king of all emotions? The muse of all poets and dreamers? You are not a romantic?” I suddenly lost my cool. “You foolish woman, I wanted you to take my pour, to soothe your heart with all that water. God knows you need some calming. Why don't you use what I give, let it slide through your body, and not drink it all up. Don't you understand I do not know whose water I carry, of which lake, which ocean, which factory's melted fume. I can be toxic.” “Just showers then? And inspiration?” I asked, tears already dramatising my face. He leaned over and kissed my forehead, wet, always beautifully wet, and whispered  “and surrender.”
