Ghulam Azam plotted war crimes in '71
2013-02-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-269815

The prosecution yesterday placed argument at the International Crimes Tribunal-1 on how Jamaat-e-Islami chief Ghulam Azam had conspired crimes against humanity during the Liberation War in 1971.

The conspiracy charge was brought against him based on six incidents, upon which different crimes against humanity had been perpetrated across Bangladesh.

The prosecution's arguments were based on witnesses' testimonies, newspaper reports, documents and statements made by Ghulam Azam in 1971.

Prosecutor Sultan Mahmud Simon made the reasoning while placing closing argument in the war crimes case against Ghulam Azam for the third day.

Azam, ameer of East Pakistan Jamaat-e-Islami during the Liberation War, is facing five charges -- of conspiracy, planning, incitement, complicity, and torture and murder.

Quoting two reports of Daily Azad, prosecutor Simon said Ghulam Azam had met then governor of East Pakistan Tikka Khan at the latter's house in Dhaka on April 4 and April 6 in 1971. There he had proposed forming of the peace committee.

During cross-examination on February 7, Brig Gen (dismissed) Abdullahil Aman Azmi, Ghulam Azam's son and also a defence witness in the case, said his father had met top authorities of Pakistan on April 4, 1971. He, however, claimed that no one knew what they had discussed in that meeting.

The prosecution yesterday said Ghulam Azam had met then Pakistani president Yahya Khan on December 1, 1971 and gave a statement in support of the oppressors and termed the freedom fighters as terrorists and Indian intruders.

Prosecutor Simon also mentioned of four other incidents saying Ghulam Azam had conspired to lead atrocities on Bangladeshis.

Claiming that he had successfully proved the conspiracy charge against Ghulam Azam, the prosecutor sought his punishment.

Earlier, in her deposition prosecution witness Sultana Kamal had said Ghulam Azam often used to meet with Tikka Khan [the then martial law administrator], Pakistani army officers and other leaders. They discussed ways of maintaining integrity of Pakistan and issued statements in this regard.

As a continuation of his Monday's argument, the prosecutor in the morning session of his argument showed the tribunal how prosecution witnesses linked Ghulam Azam as a person of "superior status" in their testimonies.

First prosecution witness historian Muntassir Mamoon in his testimony had said he after analysing the speeches of Ghulam Azam had found three points very common in his every speech. These are: preventing and eradicating "miscreants" and supporters of the Liberation War, calling upon the "patriots" (Pakistanis) for support, and arming the "patriots" if required.

Mentioning this, the prosecutor yesterday said such speech was only possible for a person with superior status.

Citing that Ghulam Azam had met the Saudi king after the Liberation War and sought his help, prosecutor Simon argued that if Azam was not a man of superior status, he couldn't have met the king.

The proceeding of the case was adjourned until today, when the prosecution will place arguments on rest of the charges.
