Genocide of 1971- “It must be remembered, not forgotten”
2014-06-10T00:01:50+06:00 | Abdur Razzak Razib and Ujjaene Acharjee Puja
https://www.thedailystar.net/genocide-of-1971-it-must-be-remembered-not-forgotten-27788

The most ignominious episode in lifetime of Bangladesh is the Genocide that had been occurred 43 years back in 1971 but the blood stain didn't fade away. The cruel birth of Bangladesh confers upon the nation a moral obligation to know and study about 1971's Genocide and the other international crimes that the history of mankind experienced in different times. It is said that, to prevent genocide we must know about genocide as it must be remembered, not forgotten. With an intent to increase the understanding of the history and legacy of genocide and other massive violations of human rights, Centre for the Study of Genocide and Justice (CSGJ), Liberation War Museum, Bangladesh, has embarked on a mission to organise and promote research, documentation, study, education and network on genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in Bangladesh and other parts of the world. As a corollary of this initiative, the Centre offered its very first month long certificate course on Genocide and Justice on may 2014 and it we were privileged to meet Professor Anisuzzaman Sir as a Chairperson of the Centre. The course brought together 30 vibrant participants from diverse backgrounds including students, journalists, academics, researchers, doctors, lawyers and bankers. Alongside, it gathered a cohort of country's renowned figures from relevant fields as resource persons to enlighten the participants on various aspects in relation to Genocide and issues of justice viewed from the perspective of different national and international tribunals established for the prosecution of international crimes. All of us may have a vague and indefinite idea on Genocide but the prodigious speakers made their points on basis of definite structure. The course offered lectures by renowned academicians like Professor Dr. Mizanur Rahman, Dr. M.A. Hasan, Professor Imtiaz Ahmed, Dr. Ashfaque Hossain, Professor Abu Md. Delwar Hossain and Ms. Christine Richardson on basic understanding of Genocide and its human rights implications with reference to Genocide Convention and some other international legal instruments. In line with that, different international crimes tribunals were comparatively discussed linking with Bangladesh's one. Author-activist Shahriar Kabir and Mofidul Hoque, Director of CSGJ had heaved many unfolded parts of Bangladesh's history which made the whole classroom spellbound as if they are watching the live history. Prosecutor Zead Al-Malum, Barrister Tureen Afroz and Barrister Tapas Kanti Baul along with the Chief Investigator M.A Hannan from ICT-BD brought to the participants a brief account of Tribunal's functions, challenges and success in the trial process. Umme Wara, Coordinator of CSGJ, raised concerns in regard to the protection of witnesses testifying in the tribunal and urged for enacting a legislation ensuring the protection for witnesses. The eminent activist Barrister Sara Hossain and Zayed Hasan, Co-ordinator of Samajik Sahayata Udyog drew attention to the fact that Beerangonas remained outside the purview of State's priority and policy formulation which needs to be addressed as soon as possible. This course indeed, apart from imparting knowledge and understanding of Genocide and Justice, gave the participants, essentially a good insight into the history of our liberation war. It prompted them to re-think some issues quite afresh and sensitised to stand by the victims of liberation war and work on mobilising efforts to successfully hold the trial of war criminals. The certificate giving program was held on 31 May, 2014 which was graced by the presence of National University Vice Chancellor, Dr. Harunoor Rashid as the chief guest. Among others, the trustee board members, Mr. Mofidul Hoque and Ziauddin Tariq Ali, were present. At the end of the program, CSGJ expressed its desire to initiate, in near future, a Diploma Course and journal publication on Genocide and Justice.

THE WRITERS ARE LLM STUDENTS FROM JAGANNATH UNIVERSITY AND DHAKA UNIVERSITY RESPECTIVELY.
