USA, UK call for restraint
2021-11-24T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/usa-uk-call-restraint-2901306

November 24, 1971

US, UK EXPRESSED CONCERN

Both America and Britain expressed their concern at the military confrontation between India and Pakistan, and appealed to the two states for restraint in the present " potentially dangerous situation in the subcontinent".

But while the British government was pressed in the House of Lords to raise the issue in the Security Council as a real threat to the world peace, the US and the Soviet Union took up direct bilateral diplomatic contact.

Meanwhile, the UN Secretary General U Thant was 'gravely concerned' about the situation and was following the development there closely.

WE ARE AT WAR, SAYS PAK DIPLOMAT

Pakistan Ambassador to the US Agha Muhammad Reza said his country was in a state of undeclared war with India. " Definitely we are at war," he commented.

The ambassador said the trouble in East Pakistan was an internal affair which had nothing to do with India. If we left Pakistan, he claimed, " we would settle it."

PAKISTAN CALLS UP OFFICERS ON LEAVE

All officers on leave before retirement and reservists in Pakistan was asked to report for duty immediately. A special announcement to this effect was made by the general headquarters in Rawalpindi today.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini captured Fulgazi and Chandgazi today and consolidated their position in the whole area.

Mukti Bahini cleared areas along Atgram, Rahimpur and Zakiganj road in Sylhet district today.

The daring naval commandos raided Bahadurabad Ghat on the river Jumna tonight. The ammunition depot of the occupation troops were shelled resulting in the explosion and damaging of a steamer. The jetty was also damaged.

In Kushtia district, Mukti Bahini ambushed enemy platoon at Maheshkundi today  inflicting heavy casualties on the enemy.

Mukti Bahini encountered Pak troops near Tilakpur today killing 17 enemy soldiers.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected] .
