Point of no return: Yahya
2021-11-25T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/point-no-return-yahya-2902221

November 25, 1971

RUSSIA WARNS PAKISTAN

The Soviet Union made a new urgent appeal to Pakistan to desist from escalating the situation in the Indian subcontinent. It warned Pakistan against disastrous consequences should that country persist in its present war like course in total disregard of international counsel for peaceful means of resolving its problems.

The Soviet note delivered to Pakistan demanded the Pakistan military regime to come to political terms with the parties fighting for East Pakistan's independence.

YAHYA ACCUSES INDIA OF DISTURBING PEACE

Pakistan President Yahya Khan said today that the "current situation" had brought his country's relations with India to a point of no return. Inaugurating a China-aided heavy machinery factory at Taxila, he said Pakistan would defend the "honour and integrity'' with all forces at its command.

Yahya accused India of having committed aggression against East Pakistan and of disturbing the peace in the subcontinent.

Meanwhile, Pakistan today officially asked Britain to use its influence to prevent a worsening of the India-Pakistan situation.

The Pakistan high commissioner in London General Mohammad Yusuf called on British Prime Minister Heath and handed to him Yahya's message in which the Pakistan president expressed the hope that Britain would use its influence to "restrain India".

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini  attacked a razakar camp in Mirsharai area today. They killed three razakars and recovered a number of rifles and some ammunition.

Mukti Bahini raided Gara area of Sylhet district today and cleared up to Goyainghat-Radhanagar. During the raid, Mukti Bahini killed 10 enemy soldiers and captured large quantity of ammunitions.

Mukti Bahini encircled Mohanganj Police Station and Panihata camp of the occupation troops in Mymensingh district.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani irregular forces in Monakhali area in Kushtia district. In the action 12 Rangers were killed, 12 others were injured. On the same day, Mukti Bahini attacked with mortars on the occupation troops in Amanganda area killing two and injuring four enemy soldiers.

During the night of November 25, 1971, Mukti Bahini raided Kazipur Police Station and killed 16 West Pakistani Policemen and enemy irregular soldiers.

On the same date, Mukti Bahini raided Pakistani troops position at Madhupur  killing six enemy troops.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected] .
