I would like the Indians to be embarrassed: Nixon
2021-11-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/i-would-the-indians-be-embarrassed-nixon-2903011

November 26, 1971

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION BETWEEN NIXON AND KISSINGER

US President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger, in a telephone conversation today, informed President Nixon that he had told China, "You can't just say you are against the Indians and you better tell the Pakistanis what you are going to do. Do it independently and show them the resolution you are putting forth.. We are going pretty far in condemning India."

Nixon said, "I noticed with interest the Pakistanis claim they are doing pretty well and I would like the Indians to be embarrassed."

MAY BE WAR IN TEN DAYS, SAYS YAHYA

Pakistan President Yahya Khan said in ten days he might be off fighting in a war.

In a speech at a dinner for a visiting Chinese delegation he claimed that Indira Gandhi had spurned his offer of friendship made in an Eid message recently , and said, " If that woman thinks that she is going to cow me down I refuse to take it".

General Yahya again responded to Chinese reaffirmation of support for Pakistan by saying "Let this be heard to the anguish of others - loud and clear- that we have always found a friend in China."

NAP BANNED

President Yahya today banned the National Awami Party and ordered the house arrest of some of its leaders in what appeared to be a prelude to crackdown on his critics.

A two-man special court was also set up to try cases of conspiracy, spying and  aiding the enemy.

Despite the ban those elected to national and provincial assemblies on the NAP ticket could retain their seats.

The ban covered both the Bhashani  and Wali Khan factions.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini raided Iswarganj police station today and killed 2 West Pakistani policemen and 3 Razakars.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pakistani troops near Dharmadaha today  killing 7 Pakistani soldiers.

Mukti Bahini liberated Brahmpura area in Dinajpur district today.

Mukti Bahini damaged a railway bridge between Domar and Chilham today. In the same area they also captured 3 razakars along with their arms.

Muktibahini capture the Paanch Matha intersection at Jhenidah, disconnecting the cantonment from rest of the country. They put barricades on Kushtia-Chuadanga highway.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected] .
