No justice expected from Security Council: Indira
2021-11-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/no-justice-expected-security-council-indira-2904336

November 28, 1971

INDIRA GANDHI'S SPEECH

Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi today said any reference of the present tension on the Indian subcontinent to the UN Security Council would neither help ease the situation nor would it materially affect the situation.

Addressing a massive public meeting in Jaipur, the Indian premier said, "Pakistan had committed aggressions against us four times in the past. It is clear that we did not attack Pakistan but what did the Security Council do to help us against the aggressions?"

She said no justice could be expected from the Security Council which didn't even bother to know about the plight of the Bangladeshi refugees in India

RUSSIA WOULD REJECT ATTEMPT TO INVOLVE COUNCIL

Soviet Union indicated today it would reject attempts to involve the UN Security Council and the five great powers in the Bangladesh crisis.

Pravda said in its international review section, "reactionary forces in Pakistan and abroad are doing everything to use the situation for aggravating Indo-Pak relations and for giving it the character of an international crisis."

Meanwhile, US president Nixon sent messages to India, Pakistan and Soviet Union asking them to do everything in their power to prevent escalation of border incidents in the subcontinent.

The US president decided to intervene personally in the crisis.

Italy joined Belgium in sponsoring the resolution which called for meeting of the Security Council on the "threat to peace" in the Indian subcontinent.

YAHYA'S MESSAGE TO THANT

Pakistan president Yahya Khan sent a message today to the UN secretary-general U Thant inviting his attention to the rapidly deteriorating situation in the subcontinent.

In the message, Yahya proposed the stationing of UN observers and reported on the "violations of Pakistan territory by India".

ON THE WAR FRONT

On the night of November 28, Mukti Bahini attacked Pak troops at Gaurinagar and captured portion of Gaurinagar from enemy occupation. Twelve Pak soldiers were killed during the operation.

In a fierce battle at Gauripur near Kanaighat police station today, Mukti Bahini killed 75 Pakistani soldiers, including an officer. Seven Pak soldiers were taken prisoner. In Sylhet district, fighting was going on near Kanaighat.

Mukti Bahini ambushed Pak patrol in Kurikhola today killing two Pak soldiers and three Razakars.

Freedom fighters destroyed a Pakistani army vehicle in Munshbazar today. In a raid on Barhatta police station, freedom fighters killed 10 enemy irregulars.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
