Carry out more research on Liberation War
2021-11-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/carry-out-more-research-liberation-war-2904591

Speakers at a virtual discussion yesterday said more research, especially at the universities, on the country's Liberation War should be carried out to enlighten future generations about the most significant event of the country's history.

They also said disseminating authentic history among students is essential not only to uphold the spirit of the Liberation war, but for the country's progress as well.

The speakers said this at the virtual discussion titled "Crack Platoon: Dhaka's Freedom Fighters", organised by Gyantapas Abdur Razzaq Foundation.

Attended by freedom fighters, the discussion was the fifth installment of the foundation's initiative "Bidyapith Baithaki: Ontorongo Alape Gunijan".

Crack Platoon was a group that conducted major guerrilla operations in Dhaka against the Pakistan army during the Liberation War.

Addressing the session, freedom fighter Habibul Alam said there should be PhD level research works on the historic March 7 speech of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

It's unfortunate that no major research work on the historic speech has been done in the 50 years of the country's independence, he said, stressing that the true history of the Liberation War should not be tainted.

It is unfortunate that the number of research works on the Liberation War has not been up to expectations, said the foundation's Director General Prof Ahrar Ahmad.

Welcoming the participants, he said the country's Liberation War was not just a mere event but a "fearless journey" to achieve and uphold certain principles and dreams.

On the significance of the Crack Platoon, its member freedom fighter Ali Ahmed Ziauddin recalled that between June and August in 1971, the platoon members kept Dhaka city's situation out of control of the Pakistani occupation forces with their "reckless" tactics.

Such guerrilla warfare played a significant role in inspiring the common people, who were largely in the dark about the resistance until then, he said.

Among others, freedom fighter and eminent theatre personality Nasir Uddin Yousuff and freedom fighter Fateh Ali Chowdhury recalled their memories of the battlefield at the discussion.
