Indira wants Pak troop withdrawn from Bangladesh
2021-11-30T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/indira-wants-pak-troop-withdrawn-bangladesh-2905961

November 30, 1971

INDIRA'S SPEECH AT RAJYA SABHA

Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi today suggested straightway withdrawal of Pakistani troops from Bangladesh as a gesture of peace . The presence of troops in Bangladesh is a "threat to our security", she claimed.

In her speech at the Rajya Sabha she further said that next month would be one of great difficulty for the people of Bangladesh and India. She urged all the parties to unite and face the challenge.

Indira Gandhi said India had remained restrained but "we can't allow annihilation of the entire people next door. It is not in our national interest that the entire unarmed population of Bangladesh should be annihilated. This will increase the threat to our security".

Referring to Pakistan's consistent attempt to internationalise the issue by making it and Indo-Pak problem Indira Gandhi said the bid to bring in the Security Council was part of the same game to confuse reality and those who were moving in the matter couldn't but the suspect in the eyes of the people of India.

She spoke highly of Mukti Bahini and said, " They have our good wishes.They have our support also."

THANT'S MOVE FOR COUNCIL DEBATE

UN Secretary General U Thant sent Pakistan's request for the posting of UN observers on the East Pakistan border to the Security Council for debate.  The Secretary General could authorise sending of observers in the case of emergency but it had to be ultimately ratified by the Council.

HEATH REJECTS BANGLADESH RECOGNITION DEMAND

Recognition of Bangladesh and expulsion of Pakistan from the Commonwealth were demanded in the British Parliament today. However, the British Prime Minister Heath rejected both the suggestions.

ON THE WAR FRONT

After hours of fight from November 29, the joint force of Daukee sub-Sector troops and 3rd Bengal regiment eventually liberates Radhanagar. Three freedom fighters embraced martyrdom. Pakistan army was devastated in this battle. Simultaneously Goyainghat was freed by the allied force and Mukti Bahini.

The Pakistan Army was suffering serious reverses in almost all the fronts in Bangladesh. Even according to Pakistan's own admission , Mukti Bahini established firm control over  Chaugacha in Jashore, Radhanagar in Sylhet, Jibannagar in Kushtia and Panchagarh . Fierce battle continued at Sector No 3 in  Akhaura.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
