Bangladesh will stand by India: Qamaruzzaman
2021-11-29T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-will-stand-india-qamaruzzaman-2905156

November 29, 1971

WORLD JURIST BODY DEMANDS DETAILS OF MUJIB'S TRIAL

The Pakistan government was called upon today to release details of the trial of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The demand came from the independent International Commission of Jurists which expressed its deep concern over the cloak of silence as to the trial.

In a statement, the commission said the Pakistan government's handling of the trial created unrest, fear and rumour to a limitless proportion.

The commission repeated its request to Pakistan President Yahya not to allow a death sentence to be carried out if the trial had already been held and Mujib been sentenced.

BANGLADESH WILL STAND BY INDIA

The Home Minister of Bangladesh Qamaruzzaman said today that 75 million people of Bangladesh would stand solidly by India against any attack by Pakistan.

On his return from extensive tour in the liberated areas inside Bangladesh, the minister said," India is a peace-loving friendly country and the people of Bangladesh will not tolerate an attack on her by Yahya and his henchmen."

Referring to the border clash, he said that Pakistan had committed "naked aggression" on India by frequent violations of the international boundary.

CHINA CRITICISES INDIA

Chinese Vice-Premier Li Hsien-Nien today criticised India and said, "India is carrying out subversive activities and military provocations against East Pakistan, the tension in the Subcontinent has been aggravated.

He added, "It is all the more impermissible for a country, under any pretext, to employ large numbers of armed troops to willfully cross its own border and invade and occupy another country's territory. The Chinese government and people resolutely support the Pakistan government and people in their just struggle against foreign aggression and in defense of their state sovereignty and national independence."

He called upon India to pay serious consideration to President Yahya Khan's proposal for withdrawal of forces from border.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Mukti Bahini killed 12 Pakistani soldiers today when they repulsed an enemy attack in Barkhai area of Mymensingh district. During this operation two freedom fighters were martyred. Mukti Bahini raided the Police Station in Netrakona town and killed six West Pakistani Police personnel.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher.  He can be contacted at [email protected] .
