‘Defeated forces of 1971 are trying to come back with their ideology’
2021-12-01T16:49:52+06:00 | Shah Alam Shazu
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/the-defeated-forces-1971-are-trying-come-back-their-ideology-2907356

National Film Award-winning actor Raisul Islam Asad has been busy with quite a few films, including renowned Indian filmmaker Shyam Benegal's biopic on Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The freedom fighter spoke candidly with The Daily Star about Bangladesh's month of victory, and more.

December is the month of victory for our country. How do you view this time of the year?

I miss the people we lost in the Liberation War, especially in this month. We fought in the war, and are now living in an independent Bangladesh. Sadly, our martyrs never got to witness our victory. So, I always miss them dearly during this time.

As a freedom fighter, do you have any unfulfilled wishes?

I certainly do. I do not believe we have established and embraced the true meaning of liberation yet, as a nation. Although we have seen significant economic development, we still have a long way to go in terms of freedom of religion. The defeated forces of 1971 are trying to come back with their ideology and actions. As a freedom fighter and a conscious citizen of Bangladesh, this concerns and saddens me. I often seek forgiveness from our martyrs in my private moments, for such reasons.

You are playing the role of Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani in Shyam Benegal's biopic on Bangabandhu. How has the experience been?

I have shot for two days for the film in Dhaka. I am playing a historic character, and I went through rigorous preparation for it. Other than that, I cannot disclose much about the film.

You have not done any new television projects for the last two years. Is there a particular reason behind this decision?

I did not take up any tele-fictions because of the pandemic for the last two years, despite getting numerous offers. I have been spending my time at home. I also went on a trip to the USA. At the moment, I only want to focus on the Bangabandhu biopic.

What can you tell us about your upcoming projects?

I have a special appearance in the film, "Mission Extreme", which is set to release on December 3. I hope people watch this film in theatres. Other than that, I have also worked on Dipankar Dipon's "Operation Sundarban".
