India recognises Bangladesh
2021-12-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/india-recognises-bangladesh-2910421

December 6, 1971

Amidst tumultuous cheers and jubilation at Lok Sabha, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi announced today that India has recognised the government of Bangladesh.

"I am glad to inform the House that in the light of the existing situation and in response to the repeated requests of the Government of Bangladesh, the Government of India has, after most careful consideration, decided to grant recognition to the Gana Prajatantri Bangladesh," said Indira Gandhi.

The members of the Lok Sabha jumped with joy to greet the announcement, and the cries of Joy Bangla reverberated the packed chambers of both the houses of the Indian parliament.

The Indian prime minister expressed hope that in due course, more nations would grant recognition to the Bangladesh government, and the country would soon be a part of the family of nations.

Conveying India's greetings and warm felicitations to Bangladesh's acting president, prime minister and people, Indira said the Bangladesh government had reiterated their anxiety to ensure expeditious return of its citizens to their homeland, and India would naturally help in every way in the process.

"Our thoughts at the moment," continued the Indian Prime Minister, "are with the father of the new state, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman".

The Indian Prime Minister further said, "The people of Bangladesh battling for their very existence, and the people of India fighting to defeat the aggression, now find themselves partisans in the same cause.

"As for the legitimacy of the Government of Bangladesh, the whole world is now aware that it reflects the will of the overwhelming majority of the people, which not many governments can claim to represent," she added.

The Indian government's decision to recognise Bangladesh was formally conveyed by Indian Foreign Secretary TN Kaul to KM Shehabuddin of the Bangladesh mission in New Delhi today. Kaul handed over to Shehabuddin a sealed letter from External Affairs Minister Swaran Singh to the Bangladesh Foreign Minister Khondakar Mostaq Ahmad. Kaul also gave Shehabuddin some copies of the prime minister's statement in parliament announcing the recognition.

The Bangladesh government hailed India's formal recognition and expressed its "thanks and deep sense of gratitude for the help -- both material and moral -- extended to the People's Republic of Bangladesh in their valiant struggle for independence by the people and the Government of India under the able and courageous leadership of the prime minister."

The Bangladesh leaders further said, "On this great and auspicious occasion, we pledge the fullest support of our people and our forces in our common task of defeating our common enemy [Pakistan].

"We look forward to an era of continued friendship, peace and cooperation between our two countries, which, we are sure will become a model of the Afro-Asian world. We shall uphold human rights and human dignity and endeavour with your cooperation to consolidate world peace and stability in this region of the world," they added.

The New York Times reported today that Pakistan privately urged the Soviet Union not to follow India's recognition of East Pakistan as the independent nation of Bangladesh.

NIXON'S LETTER TO BREZHNEV

In a letter dated December 6, 1971, US President Richard Nixon urged the Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev to use his "great influence in New Delhi" to restrain India so that "territorial integrity of Pakistan was restored and military action was brought to an end".

"I regret to say that what is happening now in South Asia, where you are supporting the Indian government's open use of force against the independence and integrity of Pakistan, merely serves to aggravate an already grave situation. Beyond that, however, this course of developments runs counter to the recent encouraging trend in international relations to which the mutual endeavors of our two governments have been making such a major contribution," said Nixon.

"I must state frankly that," continued Nixon, "it would be illusory to think that if India can somehow achieve its objectives by military action the issue will be closed. An accomplished fact brought about in this way would long complicate the international situation and undermine the confidence that we and you have worked so hard to establish. It could not help but have an adverse effect on a whole range of other issues."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
