General Assembly holds emergency debate
2021-12-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/general-assembly-holds-emergency-debate-2911241

December 7, 1971

RESOLUTION OF THE UN

The UN General Assembly today held an emergency debate on the Indo-Pakistan war with Argentina proposing an immediate ceasefire and withdrawal of troops of both sides. The war issue was sent to the General Assembly last night after the Soviet Union vetoed similar resolutions twice in the Security Council.

After a long debate participated by representatives of various governments including the US, Poland and Indonesia, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution calling upon the governments of India and Pakistan to take forthwith all measures for an immediate ceasefire and withdrawal of their armed forces on the territory of the other to their own side of the India-Pakistan borders.

The resolution urged that efforts be intensified in order to bring about conditions, speedily and in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter, necessary for voluntary return of the East Pakistan refugees to their homes.

It also called for full cooperation of all states with the secretary-general for rendering assistance to and relieving the distress of those refugees.

CHINA ASSAILS INDIA

China today denounced India's recognition of the Bangladesh government, calling it an example of Indian "expansionism" and part of a plot by India to annex East Pakistan.

AMIN PRIME MINISTER, BHUTTO DEPUTY PM

With the war between Pakistan and India reaching a critical phase, Pak president Yahya Khan tonight appointed a civilian prime minister and deputy prime minister whose immediate task was to plead Pakistan's case before the United Nations. The real power would be retained by Yahya.

The Pak president named Nurul Amin, a Bangalee lawyer and the president of Pakistan Democratic Party (PDP), as prime minister. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, a former foreign minister, who was the leader Pakistan Peoples Party, was named deputy prime minister.

BREZHNEV'S LETTER TO NIXON

In a reply to US president Nixon's letter, Soviet general secretary Brezhnev today said, "The Soviet Union applies and will continue to apply most determined efforts in order to stop the bloodshed and to turn the course of events towards political settlement. We trust this is possible."

"The thing to do now," Brezhnev continued, "is to stop the war already underway. This requires a ceasefire. But the question arises -- what is the best way to achieve it? It seems to us that proceeding from the situation which developed from the very start, effective can be such a ceasefire which would be connected with a simultaneous decision for a political settlement, based on the recognition of the will of the East Pakistani population. Otherwise it is impossible to ensure the respect for the lawful rights and interests of the people of East Pakistan and to create conditions for the return of the millions of refugees. Without it a ceasefire will not be stable."

Kissinger briefed Nixon on Brezhnev's letter less than two hours after he received it. Charaterising it as "old proposals", he commented, "It is a very conciliatory letter, which is in itself unacceptable." Kissinger proposed the following response: "If this negotiation is within the framework of the united Pakistan, with maximum autonomy for the east, we are willing to discuss it with them. That will separate them to some extent from the Indians. And secondly, it will get us a ceasefire in the west, which we've got to have if the West Pakistanis aren't to be smashed."

ON THE WAR FRONT

Indian Army's Eastern Command reported tonight that Jashore, a division headquarters and the military linchpin of the western half of East Pakistan, had been taken in a fierce 24‐hour battle. Pakistani troops said to be fleeing in disarray to the south.

At about 6:30pm, just after Jashore had fallen, the Indian Army chief of staff, General SHFJ Manekshaw, issued a message to be broadcast to the 70,000 Pakistani troops in East [Pakistan: "Officers and jawans [soldiers] of the Pakistan Army, lay down your arms before it is too late. Time is running out. Indian forces have encircled you. Your fate is sealed."

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
