Saidul Anam Tutul’s last film ‘Kalbela’ premieres at Liberation War Museum
2021-12-08T23:18:12+06:00 | Rakshanda Rahman Misha
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/saidul-anam-tutuls-last-film-kalbela-premieres-liberation-war-museum-2913021

Renowned director and freedom fighter Saidul Anam Tutul's last movie "Kalbela" premiered today at the Liberation War Museum.

Prior to the screening of the movie, Liberation War Museum Trustee and noted essayist Mofidul Haque, along with Saidul Anam's widow, Mobashera Khanam, gave speeches on the stage.

"Today is both a day of happiness and sadness for us. Saidul Anam's biggest dream is being premiered today but he is no longer with us. He passed away while working on the film. Later on, Mobashera completed it. We wanted to host a premiere of the movie in the Liberation War Museum, as this film holds a special place in our hearts," said Mofidul Haque.

Mobashera Khanam was emotional, remembering her late husband.

"My husband died after shooting the movie, and after his departure, both my daughter and I were worried as to what will happen to it. This was his dream project and we decided we will complete the movie," stated Mobashera Khanam.

"He couldn't complete the post-production work, but he had some directions regarding editing. He tried to depict the stories of the Liberation War, but he did not want to showcase violence or murder through his film. He wanted to highlight the after-effects of the brutalities of 1971, and the empowering story of a woman as she stands tall against the dogmas of society," added Mobashera.

A moment of silence was observed to remember both Saidul Anam Tutul and the film's music composer, Farid Ahmed.

The Liberation War film received a government grant in the fiscal year 2017-2018.

It will be released in cinema halls on December 10. The movie has been jointly produced by Liberation War Museum and Akar Production, and it showcases an intriguing and riveting story of the war.

"Kalbela '' depicts the story of Sanjida, a new bride, who has to survive on her own after her husband is taken away by the Pakistani forces. Set against the backdrop of the 1971 Liberation War, the film depicts the uncertain journey of the common people, as they try to seek refuge, the brutalities of the Pakistani Army and their connections with their allies, and the social unrest that persisted during that period.

The lead characters in the movie is played by Tahmina Authoi and Shishir.

The film also stars Jayanto Chattopadhyay, Tanvir Mashud, Masum Basher, Mili Basher, Lutfor Rahman George, Saika Ahmed among others.

Saidul Anam Tutul started filming "Kalbela" in October 2018. However, he passed away in the same year, before completing the post-production work. Later on, Mobashwera Khanam took over the post-production duties.

The cinematography for the film was done by Ripon Rahman Khan, while the movie was edited by National Award-winning editor Samir Ahmed.

The music of the movie was composed by the late National Award-winning music director,  Farid Ahmed, who passed away on April 13, 2021, due to Covid-19.
