Pakistan accepts truce call of UN
2021-12-09T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/pakistan-accepts-truce-call-un-2913121

December 9, 1971

UN TRUCE CALL: PAKISTAN ACCEPTS, INDIA REJECTS

Pakistan informed the United Nations today that she had "decided to accept" the General Assembly's call for ceasefire and for a withdrawal of hostile troops to their own soil.

In message to UN Secretary General U Thant, Pakistani chief delegate Agha Shahi said, "Under the instructions of my Government, I have the honor to state that even though the resolution fails to take note of the Indian aggression against Pakistan (which has been admitted by India), the Government of Pakistan has decided to accept the call for an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of troops contained in that resolution.

"Inasmuch as the resolution provides for an immediate withdrawal of the troops of each party to its own side of the border and thus would stop bloodshed, Pakistan is willing to overlook its inadequacies at this time," he added.

Elaborating on the Pakistani message, a delegation spokesman said that a ceasefire and a withdrawal "cannot be unilateral." This confirmed a Government declaration in Rawalpindi that Pakistan would comply with the Assembly resolution only if India did the same.

On the other hand, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi rejected the General Assembly's truce call. She said that India would "take all steps" to achieve the independence of Bangladesh.

The New York Times reported that the emissary to the United States of the Bengali "secessionists" welcomed signs that Washington was taking a less pro-Pakistani position in the crisis. The envoy Mustafizur Rahman Siddiqi, according to the newspaper, said that Bangladesh had stepped up its appeal for United States recognition this week, as Mitro Bahini gained the upper hand in East Pakistan.

ON THE WAR FRONT

Indian aircraft attacked Karachi harbor and city early today, sinking one merchant ship and killing more than 60 civilians, the Pakistan radio reported. The radio said that a second ship had been set ablaze and a third, a foreign vessel, had been seriously damaged. In an earlier attack during the night, Indian planes struck a petroleum storage tank near the harbor and set it on fire, the radio added.

The commander of India's eastern forces Lieut. Gen. Jagjit Singh Aurora said tonight that the retreat of the Pakistanis in East Pakistan had become a rout as Mitro Bahini continued to push the Pak troops into an ever-shrinking circle whose center is Dhaka. He added that the air force had had "a field day" the last 24 hours, shooting up river boats loaded with Pakistani troops trying to escape.

Mitro Bahini took three important towns on or near the Meghna --- Ashuganj, Chandpur and Daudkandi.

In the eastern sector, Moulvi Bazar was captured.  In the western sector, a vast area west of the Madhumati River had been liberated.

NEUTRAL ZONE IN DHAKA

The US State Department said today that a "neutral zone", comprising the Intercontinental Hotel, the Holy Family Hospital and the headquarters of the United Nations relief operations, had been established in Dhaka to protect nearly 500 foreigners, including some 70 Americans. The zone would serve as an assembly area for the foreigners before they were taken to the airport to be flown out.

A spokesman said that the creation of the "neutral zone" was requested by the United Nations and the United States in expectation of ground fighting in Dhaka as Indian troops approached.

BANGLADESH MISSION INAUGURATED IN NEW DELHI

A mission of the People's Republic of Bangladesh was inaugurated in New Delhi today by the Chief of the Mission Humayun Rasheed Choudhury. He unfurled the flag of Bangladesh in the accompaniment of a band and the booming of guns. Expressing the gratitude of his government for the help given by India in hte hour of peril, Choudhury said Bangladesh forces would be prepared to fight shoulder to shoulder with their Indian brethren to repulse Pakistani aggression in western front of India.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
