FBCCI honours 9 organisations for contribution during Liberation War, post-independence
2021-12-15T17:01:21+06:00 | Star Business Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/business/news/fbcci-honours-9-organisations-contribution-during-liberation-war-post-independence-2918271

Nine organisations have been awarded for their contribution during the Liberation War and post-independence of Bangladesh.

The Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FBCCI) today honoured them today, on the 14th day of its 16-day programme titled "Bijoyer 50 Bochhor: Laal Sobujer Mohotshab" which began on December 1 at Hatirjheel Amphitheatre in Dhaka.

The organisations are Chhayanaut, Bangladesh Udichi Shilpi Gosthi, Khelaghar, Bangladesh Group Theater Federation, Bangladesh Graam Theater, Kachi-Kanchar Mela, Shadhin Bangla Football Team, Liberation War Museum and Projonmo '71.

While receiving the awards, leaders of the organisations expressed their gratitude and vowed that they will continue their activities in the future to keep the spirit of the Liberation War alive.

Addressing the programme, Tazul Islam, minister for Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, said Bangabandhu has struggled all his life dreaming of improving the people's life.

"When he (Bangabandhu) realised that there was no alternative to independence for the betterment of the fortunes of the Bengali nation, he declared independence," Islam said.

Now Bangladesh is full of food, roads are improved and this country is moving forward, he said. "This trend of development will continue."

"On this day in 1971, we lost the best citizens of the country. But the killers do not know that the person can be killed, not the ideal of the person," said Asaduzzaman Noor, former cultural affairs minister.

FBCCI President Md Jashim Uddin said that it was planned to make the Bengali nation incompetent. But their conspiracy did not succeed due to the strong leadership of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Dhaka North City Corporation Mayor Atiqul Islam said Turkey has built a park named after Bangabandhu. So, the Father of the Nation is not a leader of Bangladesh only, rather, he is a global Icon, he added.

Chhayanaut Vice-President Khairul Anam (Shakil), Bangladesh Udichi Shilpi Gosthi General Secretary Jamshed Alam Tapan and Founder Member Golam Mohammad Idu, Khelaghar Presidium Members Kamal Chowdhury and Shomi Kaiser, Bangladesh Group Theater Federation Secretary General Kamal Bayazid received the awards on behalf of their organisations.

Besides, Nasir Uddin Yusuf of Bangladesh Graam Theater, Kachi-Kanchar Mela Vice President Alpana Chowdhury, General Secretary Abdul Mueed Chowdhury Walid, Shadhin Bangla Football Team Manager Tanvir Mazhar Tanna, Liberation War Museum Trustee and Member Secretary Sara Zaker and Projonmo '71 President Asif Munir Tanmoy, Vice President Shomi Kaiser and General Secretary Kazi Saifuddin Abbas received the award.
