Bangladesh wins freedom
2021-12-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Shamsuddoza Sajen
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bangladesh-wins-freedom-2918491

December 16, 1971

PAKISTAN SURRENDERS

The Liberation War in Bangladesh formally ended with the unconditional surrender by the Pakistan army in Dhaka today. The instrument of surrender was signed at Dhaka at 4:31pm by Lt Gen AAK Niazi on behalf of Pakistan Eastern Command, and Lt Gen Jagjit Singh Aurora, Commander in Chief of Indian and Bangladesh forces in the eastern theater, accepted the surrender.

A GREAT LANDMARK: TAJUDDIN

Tajuddin Ahmad, prime minister of Bangladesh, said today that the surrender of the Pakistani troops in Dhaka was a great landmark in the history of the liberation struggle.

"We hope that Pakistan and her friends would take a lesson from today," he added.

The Bangladesh prime minister expressed the deep gratitude of his government and the people of Bangladesh to India, Soviet Union, Poland and other countries which had supported Bangladesh in times of need.

INDIRA GANDHI'S CEASEFIRE STATEMENT

In a statement issued today, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said, "I have repeatedly declared India has no territorial ambitions. Now that the Pakistani armed forces have surrendered in Bangladesh and Bangladesh is free, it is pointless in our view to continue the present conflict.

"Therefore, it is our aim to stop further bloodshed and unnecessary loss of life. We have ordered our armed forces to cease fire everywhere on the western front with effect from 8:00pm tomorrow, December 17. It is our earnest hope that there will be a corresponding and immediate response from the Government of Pakistan," she added.

KISSINGER'S MESSAGE TO FARLAND

In a backchannel message, US President's Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger informed US Ambassador to Pakistan Joseph Farland today, "I believe it is essential that [Pakistan President] Yahya move as quickly as possible to publicly accept Indian ceasefire proposal on a purely bilateral basis which would deprive Indians of any pretext for claiming Pakistani delays have justified continuation of fighting in the West.

"I have just learned from British that Indians intend to keep their ceasefire offer open for only 24 hours. I have also learned that Soviets may move a formal resolution in the UN Security Council tonight which could be the source of extended controversy," he added.

"For this reason," continued Kissinger, "A unilateral announcement by Pakistan would then allow sufficient time to hammer out an acceptable UN resolution which would formalise the bilateral agreement between the two governments. In his unilateral acceptance Yahya could also recommend a formalization of the procedure within the UN forum."

YAHYA ACCEPTS DEFEAT

In a broadcast today Pakistan President Yahya Khan accepted that "we have been overwhelmed in the eastern sector". He, however, vowed to continue the fight in the western sector.

"We may lose a battle, but final victory in this war of survival shall Inshallah be ours. At this time, our hearts go out to our brethren in East Pakistan, who are being relentlessly subjected to terror and tribulation by the warlords of Bharat. To them we say: This is not the end," added Yahya.

Shamsuddoza Sajen is a journalist and researcher. He can be contacted at [email protected]
