Celebration of Victory Day continues
2021-12-17T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/views/editorial/news/celebration-victory-day-continues-2919191

Bangladesh continues to celebrate the victory of December 16, 1971, showing deep respect to the martyrs who laid down their lives for the country. On this happy occasion, world leaders have sent their messages acknowledging the strong presence of Bangladesh on the world map, and the fact that its economy is growing steadily. Bangladeshis are especially joyous to have been able to host the president of India, Shri Ram Nath Kovind, who is here on a three-day visit. The visit is considered significant by experts on international relations.

Bangladesh and India are two friendly neighbours who have surmounted many obstacles together in the last 50 years to carry forward the flag of peace and progress. The two countries are linked with one another on many fronts of development and mutual cooperation as partners in progress. President Ram Nath Kovind laid importance on increasing the sphere of the existing trade and business ties with Bangladesh through joint venture efforts. He pointed at the improved communication system through land, air and riverine routes, which businessmen should take advantage of. He also assured Bangladesh of continued Indian cooperation to the ongoing business investment and different development projects in the coming days. President Kovind pointed at the celebration of 50 years of diplomatic relations between India and Bangladesh, which was a testimony to the close bilateral relations between the two countries. He praised Bangladesh's efforts in the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic.

India hoped to see substantial advances in terms of green technologies, renewables, creation of employment opportunities, start-ups, creation of IT and digital platforms, etc in the next 10 years. The large young population of the two countries will ensure dynamic growth and positive changes. We have to keep in focus that just as the friendship between Bangladesh and India is strong, so is the enormity of the issues that link the two countries. While we have resolved some of them successfully, some still remain unaddressed. Let's not assume that we shall not have issues with India, but let's firmly commit to address them through dialogue in the spirit of friendship.

As we look to the future, Bangladesh will be a developing country soon, and this would bring forth enormous potential of economic engagement with India. But as a growing economy, we shall need to expand our bilateral relations with other world economies as well, including China. Bangladesh will need Chinese investment for the growth of its economy as we pursue a policy of friendship to all. But it needs to be emphasised here that our relations with India will always be special because of its contribution to our Liberation War.

We hope that President Ram Nath Kovind will have a very happy and fruitful visit, and wish the two countries Godspeed in their progress.
