Seldom has humanity witnessed sacrifices as in 1971: Indian President
2021-12-16T21:59:01+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/asia/south-asia/news/seldom-has-humanity-witnessed-sacrifices-1971-indian-president-2919121

Visiting Indian President Ram Nath Kovind today said that seldom has humanity witnessed sacrifices on a scale so epic as during the 1971 Liberation War.

"Your struggle for freedom has a special place in the hearts of every Indian, especially those of my generation," President Kovind said while delivering a speech at the Victory Day and Mujib Borsho celebrations at the South Plaza of the Jatiya Sangsad today.

He added that he was inspired by the moral courage of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as a youth.

Paying tribute to the memory of the untold suffering of millions of people of Bangladesh, especially the daughters, sisters and mothers, he said, "It is their sacrifice, and the righteousness of the cause of Bangladesh, that has transformed the region."

"Like millions of others, I was electrified by his powerful voice, and the understanding that it carried the aspirations of 70 million people of Bangladesh at that time," he said.

He said like millions of Indians of his generation, they were elated by the victory of Bangladesh over an oppressive regime and were deeply inspired by the faith and courage of the people of Bangladesh.

Greeting the people of Bangladesh, the Indian president said, "We celebrate with you this historic day. Fifty years ago, the ideological map of South Asia changed irreversibly and the proud nation of Bangladesh was born."

Kovind, who is on a three-day visit to join the celebrations, said visiting the solemn memorial to the millions of martyrs at Savar and the Bangabandhu Museum yesterday were deeply emotional experiences for him.

"I was especially inspired to hear extracts of his historic March 7 speech. This is justly recognized by the UNESCO in the memory of world register as it always evokes justice freedom and democracy."

"The inspiring statesmanship of Bangabandhu, his clear-sighted moral conviction and his unflinching determination to seek justice for the people of East Pakistan were truly the game-changers.

"As a result, the world learnt a valuable lesson: that the will of the majority of people cannot be subjugated by any force, however brutal," he said

He lauded Bangladesh's economic growth, while adding: "Your country's stellar economic performance, complemented by geographical advantage, can benefit the entire sub-region and the world."

"There is a growing recognition among international experts about the fact that close sub-regional trade, economic cooperation, and connectivity will help accelerate the process of achieving a Sonar Bangla in the shortest possible period of time."

He said if the first 50 years of Indo-Bangla partnership began by surmounting extraordinary challenges that forged a deep friendship between the two peoples, perhaps the time has come to raise the bar even higher.

"To achieve that, our businesses, our academics, and especially our youth must be motivated to jointly create globally-pioneering initiatives in the world of ideas, creativity, commerce and technology," he said.

"As our nations develop and our friendship further deepens, let us continue to work together towards realizing the dreams of our peoples."
