How would I make a film based on 1971?
2021-12-16T15:25:19+06:00 | Sharmin Joya
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/how-would-i-make-film-based-1971-2919001

Young directors share their perception of their ideal Liberation War film.

Bangladesh achieved victory against Pakistan and solidified itself as a free nation on this day of 1971. This year marks the golden jubilee of our victory.

Although in the 50 years, numerous fictions, and films have been projected based on the Liberation War, very few of them seem to have explored the intensity of the war.

The Daily Star caught up with five prominent contemporary directors, who have shared their perceptions of the kind of narrations they would want to portray, if they make a film, television or web project based on the liberation war.

We have never properly shown how we have outsmarted the Pakistani army: Ashfaque Nipun

I would rather work on a drama-based story than a typical action thriller. It has been a common practice among us to showcase formulated concepts of the Liberation War of Bangladesh.

There are so many different stories that have never been told. We have defeated them with our strategy and intelligence, however, we have never properly shown how we have outsmarted the Pakistani army.

The representation of them has always been very weak in our film. Pakistani armies were known for their efficiency and that they had sharp officers and planners. The joy of victory is more enjoyable when we win against someone strong. Somehow, these stories have never been told in any medium of production yet.

At the same time, we always see the portrayal of 'Rajakar', or collaborators, as 'supporting' roles. I think there are a lot of scopes to tell their story focusing on them, including their psychology.

If we consider just Dhaka, we can focus on so many things: how people spent the festivals during the war, what the situation was during curfew, how they survived the war. Every individual who ideologically wants an independent country, has a story, and we can tell it.

I want to tell my story from a fresher perspective: Adnan Al Rajeev

For me, 1971 is a delicate matter, and a larger than life topic to deal with.

I am much more interested in telling a story of a female freedom fighter.

I want to show my protagonist as a warrior, as a mother and a wife with her growth, through a time when nothing is stable.

One of the major concerns for my project would be the production design. I want to shoot the film with high visual standards.

We have multiple films based on 1971,  but most of them fail to connect to the right audience because of a lot of problems. I want to tell my story from a fresher perspective. My vision would be connecting my film with the current generation.

I would love to portray female Rajakars, which most of us are still unaware of: Vicky Zahed

Films based on 1971 are always made from a certain point of view. We always get to see the winners' perspective. However, if I make a production on it, I would love to portray female Rajakars, which most of us are still unaware of.

Since it is an untouched topic, I want to focus on their psychology, social status and details about their association, from where did they run their operations and how they planned.

The whole story would be from their perspective, who supported Pakistan staying in Bangladesh.

There has been little data available and little research done on them. We eventually got to know that they were daughters, wives of influential people and leaders.

I think we were not able to showcase the actual terror of the war in any of our works on 1971. Budget is definitely one of the biggest barriers here, however, we have to work more on the stories that would visually put an extra impact on the horror of the genocide.

We have a lot of great stories that have already been told in our films. I believe it is time to represent the liberation war in a grandway in larger scale, presenting proper action and war.

My perception for a perfect liberation war project will have a representation of the battlefield: Rezwan Shahriar Sumit

Films on World War I, the Holocaust, and World War II are still being made from new perspectives. We also have many untold points of views. As artistes, we have to keep telling these stories because even after 50 years of our liberation war, we still get questioned by a group of people about the notion of our independence.

I definitely hold onto myself to work on this topic, but I need time to prepare myself for it. It is a vast canvas to work on. My perception for a perfect liberation war project will have a representation of the battlefield, along with the intimate stories of people's lives.

To me an interesting representation of 1971 containing people's lives is Humayun Ahmed directorial "Aguner Poroshmoni".

I feel we should make documentaries to archive the stories from different people who have witnessed the genocide: Kajal Arefin Ome

As we belong to a newer generation, we have not seen the Liberation War of Bangladesh. All the stories we know are either by reading books or watching fictions, films based on them.

I feel we should make documentaries to archive the stories from different people who have witnessed the genocide. They could be the freedom fighters and  their family members. They are the survivors, so they can tell their stories better than anyone else.

Films made from these real experiences will be much more relatable. Filmmakers can easily take information from these archives.

We have been watching similar kinds of formulated concepts in our productions.

Entertaining the audience is important, at the same time, it is essential to keep telling new stories which could be more relatable and informative.

I have not yet made any project based on 1971. It is because I have not found any untold story yet.

To me, the vast impact of the liberation war can be showcased on the silver screen, as there are many horrific stories of the war. There are also stories of little happinesses and events that helped people live during that time.

If the iconic film "Ora Egaro Jon" is made again at this time, it will be technically rich, and can get proper cinematic treatment in terms of technology.

Creating visual comfort and believable situations are very crucial for periodic projects, as the audiences already know the plot.
