Writer, Swadhin Bangla Betar Shobdo Sainik Begum Mushtari Shafi no more
2021-12-20T20:56:14+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/writer-swadhin-bangla-betar-shobdo-sainik-begum-mushtari-shafi-no-more-2921881

Eminent writer Shaheed Jaya Begum Mushtari Shafi, who worked as a Shobdo Sainik at the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro during Liberation War, passed away in Dhaka today. She was 84.

She breathed her last at the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of Combined Military Hospital (CMH) in Dhaka around 5:10pm, her son Mehraj Tahsin Shafi confirmed to our Chattogram staff correspondent.

She was suffering from different health complications including kidney, urine, and blood infection, as well as lung problems, and was taken to a Dhaka Specialised Hospital from Chattogram on December 2.

She was later shifted to the ICU of CMH on December 14, said Tahsin, adding that she was put on life support this morning but suffered cardiac arrest at around 4:45pm and doctors declared her dead at 5:10pm.

Her dead body would be kept at Dhaka Central Shaheed Minar tomorrow morning for people to pay last respects and then a namaj-e-janaza would be held at Dhaka University Central Mosque.

Her body would later be taken to Chattogram, and would be kept at Chattogram Shaheed Minar on Wednesday for people to pay final respects and she would later be buried at a graveyard in the port city.

Mushtrai Shafi was honoured with Bangla Academy Fellowship in 2016 for her role in the liberation war. She was also awarded with Begum Rokeya Padak in 2020.

She and her husband late physician Dr Mohammad Shafi, also a Liberation War martyr, along with Shobdo Sainik Mohammad played a role in the formation of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendro in Chattogram. In their residence at Enayet bazar in the port city, the couple gave shelter to many freedom fighters.

On April 7 in 1971, her husband and brother Ehsanul Hoque Ansari were picked up by Razakars and were killed later.

Born on January 15 in 1938, Mushtari Shafi played an active role in the progressive and female rights movements. She used to actively participate in all the citizen's rights movements in Chattogram.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina expressed deep shock at the death of Begum Mushtari Shafi, reports UNB.

In a condolence message, she recalled the role of Mushtari Shafi, a valiant freedom fighter, in progressive cultural and citizen movements with gratitude.

She prayed for the eternal salvation of the departed soul and expressed sympathy for her bereaved family members.
