Birangona Shefali Das’ dream to own a house still elusive
2021-12-23T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Lalmonirhat
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/birangona-shefali-das-dream-own-house-still-elusive-2923576

Birangona (war heroine) Shefali Das has been living in an abandoned quarter of Bangladesh Railway with her youngest son Kamol Das as she does not have a house of her own.

Shefali Das runs her family with the government allowance. Her eldest son, who works at a private company, lives in Dhaka. With much efforts, she has got her daughters married off.

"I don't have my own house. I live in an abandoned quarter of the railway but it is not suitable for living. If it rains a little, I can't live in the room," said Birangona Shefali Das.

"My youngest son is still unemployed. I have been living on government allowance for the last four years," she said.

Shefali Das' husband Dhiren Chandra Das was a railway employee. He died almost twenty years ago, and after the death of her husband Shefali had to live in extreme poverty with her children. After she was recognised as a Birangona Nari four years ago, she has been financially solvent.

Shefali Das said that she does not afford to buy land and build a house. So, she is forced to live in a dilapidated railway quarter. Her dream of living at her own house seems to be a far cry.

"I applied for a government house. But the government house was not allotted in my name as I did not have my own land," she said.

Kamol Das, the son of Shefali Das, said "My mother has been trying to get a government house but she is not getting it."

"As a son I can't fulfill my mother's dream to own a house," he said.

Lalmonirhat Sadar Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) Mahmuda Masum said that the application for the government house submitted by Birangona Nari Shefali Das has been sent to the ministry concerned. The construction work of her house will start after getting the approval of the ministry.

"I hope her application will be approved soon," the UNO added.
