A celebration song for the next 50
2021-12-27T16:26:20+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/news/shah-cement-sponsors-song-victory-day-2021-2926686

What will the Bangladesh of 2071 look like? Will we conquer space? Will technological prowess take us to newer heights? Will Bangladesh become a hub of world trade and commerce, with equal rights for all and equal opportunities? Will our culture expand and leave its mark on the rest of the world? All this and much more can happen, and we are already on our way. The dream is real, and it is in our grasp.

The journey of this indomitable Bangladesh began after a 9-month long bloody war – the proud tale of our independence was written at the cost of countless sacrifices and acts of bravery. On December 16, 1971, the independent state of Bangladesh was born. Now, Bangladesh is celebrating the 50th anniversary of this great victory. Inspired by the achievement of this glorious victory, Bangladesh is on the way to realise its dreams, and the red and green flag of Bangladesh is making itself known on the global stage.

The whole country is in a state of celebration on the golden jubilee of independence. Shah Cement has taken this initiative to add to the colourful atmosphere of these celebrations. In the composition and lyrics of the song "Ami i Bangladesh bijoyer ullashe, aro boro hobo agami ponchashe", the themes that were explored include victory in space, excellence in technology, global connectivity, equitable development, the exposure of our culture on the global stage, leadership in the topmost organisations in the world, exploration of maritime boundaries, progress of the quality of living to that of developed countries, and true empowerment and equality for women.

The music video, titled 'আগামী পঞ্চাশে', sponsored by Shah Cement, was uploaded on Shah Cement's Facebook page and YouTube channel on December 15. The music video has received tremendous response from the audience on Shah Cement's Facebook page. The video was viewed over 8.1 million times, as seen on the afternoon of December 27. To watch the video, click this link: আগামী পঞ্চাশে। Next50।

The song was vocalised by artists Lincoln, Nirob, Masha Islam, Tashfi, Kona, Oyshee, Salman, Innima, Yaar Hossain, Shanto, Sagar, and Nibir. Pavel Areen composed the song and was the music director, and the lyrics were penned by Zulfiqar Russel. The music video to this extraordinary song was directed by Gazi Shubhro, from his production house Red Dot.
