Echoes of freedom
2008-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-29342

War heroes and others hold candles alight after a minute's blackout beginning at the stroke of midnight in remembrance of the March 25 night.Photo: STAR

The horrors of March 25 night return to haunt the nation as it observes the 37th Independence Day today to salute those who laid down their lives for freedom.

The massacre of civilians on that night in 1971 was carried out so ruthlessly and on such a scale that the international media had no doubt that Bangalees' struggle for independence had been crushed.

But proving them wrong, sons and daughters of the delta put up a great fight against the Pakistan forces as the declaration of independence came drifting through the ether.

Numerous atrocities and brutalities over the next nine months could not stifle the indomitable spirit of the freedom fighters. Their gallantry along the length of the war steered the nation towards independence.

However, it all came for a price with at least three million people killed and over a quarter million women raped.

According to Simon Dring's report titled “Tanks Crush Revolt in Pakistan”, as many as 7,000 people were slaughtered in Dhaka alone on the night of March 25. Published on March 30 in The Daily Telegraph, it carried a first-hand account of the blood bath.

The report began, “In the name of 'God and a united Pakistan,' Dacca is today a crushed and frightened city. After 24 hours of ruthless, cold-blooded shelling by the Pakistan Army, as many as 7,000 people are dead, large areas have been levelled and East Pakistan's fight for independence has been brutally put to an end.”

The foreign journalists' accounts of that apocalyptic night revealed how desperate the then Pakistan government was to stop the news of genocide from reaching the world community.

In another story published the same day, Dring wrote, “Associated Press photographer Michel Laurent, I managed to make an extensive tour of the burning city and to see first-hand the extent of the slaughter the Government of Pakistan is trying to hide.”

Titled “Reporter Escapes Net”, it described how he, then aged 27, eluded search parties that herded foreign correspondents out of Dhaka.

Michel Laurent, an AP photographer who too evaded the army and wandered through the bleak landscape on the night of March 25, reported, “Thirty-five foreign correspondents were detained in the Dacca Intercontinental Hotel and only this reporter and a British correspondent evaded the Army cordon and subsequent deportation of newsmen to Bombay. Later the Army at Dacca airport frisked me and seized film and notes on Dacca.”

The report, published on March 30, 1971 issue of The Times, added, “The Government went to extreme lengths to prevent a large contingent of foreign journalists from witnessing the Army's intervention and the subsequent violence.”

In the chapter 'Genocide in Bangladesh' of the book “Bangladesh Documents”, Simon Dring said, “…the first target as the tanks rolled into Dacca on the night of Thursday, March 25, seems to have been the students. An estimated three battalions of troops were used in the attack on Dacca-one of armoured, one of artillery and one of infantry. They started living their barracks shortly before 10 p.m. By 11, firing had broken out and the people who had started to erect makeshift barricades-overturned cars, three stumps, furniture, and concrete piping- became early casualties.

“As the university came under attack, other columns of troops moved in on the Rajarbagh headquarters of the East Pakistan police, on the other side of the city. Tanks opened fire first, witness said; then the troops moved in and levelled the men's sleeping quarters, firing incendiary rounds into the buildings. People living opposite did not know how many died there, but of the 1,100 police based there not many are believed to have escaped.”

Laurent in the report of The Times described, “In two days and nights of shelling by the Pakistani Army perhaps 7,000 Pakistanis died in Dhaka alone. The Army, which attacked without warning on Thursday night with American supplied M24 tanks, artillery and infantry, destroyed large parts of the city.

At another point, the report read, “A mass grave had been hastily covered at the Jagannath Hall and 200 students were reported killed in Iqbal Hall. About 20 bodies were still lying in the grounds and the dormitories. Troops are reported to have fired bazookas into the medical college hospital, but the casualty toll was not known.”

Louis Heren in a report titled “Political and Intellectual Leaders Being Wiped Out in War of Genocide” published on April 2, 1971 in The Times said, “…..a systematic pattern of physical and psychological destruction became apparent even during the first night of fighting on March 25. Soon after, it became clear that certain groups had been selected to be the victims of completely unrestrained brutality.”

In the New York Times story titled “in Dacca, Troops Use Artillery To Halt Revolt” and published on March 28, 1971, Sydney H Schanberg wrote, “There was no way of knowing how many civilians had been killed or wounded. Neither was any information available on what was happening in the rest of the province, although there had been reports before the Dacca attack of clashes between civilians and west Pakistani soldiers in the interior.

“From the hotel, which is in north Dacca, huge fires could be seen in various parts of the city, including the university area and the barracks of the East Pakistan Rifles, a paramilitary force made up of Bengalis, the predominant people of East Pakistan.

“Some fires were still burning and sporadic shooting was continuing early this morning when the thirty five foreign newsmen were expelled from Dacca.

“'My God, my God,' said a Pakistani student watching from a hotel window, trying to keep back tears, 'they're killing them. They're slaughtering them'.”

Related Stories

Remembering black night

10 Indian generals to join party
