A spontaneous movement
2022-02-03T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/spontaneous-movement-2953131

In January 1952, I was the vice-president of the East Pakistan Muslim Chattra League. After Nazimuddin's speech at Paltan Maidan (January 27, 1952), I called a meeting of the representatives of all political parties and student organisations at the Dhaka Bar Library. Maolana Bhasani presided over the meeting. All Party State Language Action Committee was formed at that meeting. The Committee called a strike at all educational institutions in Dhaka on February 4, 1952.

We observed Flag Day on February 10. This was done for raising funds and ensuring mass publicity. Most likely, it was in preparation for the general strike to be held on February 21. The session of the East Pakistan Provincial Assembly was scheduled to begin on the same date and the date for a strike was fixed keeping that in view.

After the promulgation of Section 144 (February 20, 1952), an emergency meeting of the All Party State Language Action Committee was called on the evening of February 20. The question of breaking section 144 the next day was the main topic of the discussion. Abul Hashim presided over the meeting.

Opinions on the violation of Section 144 were sharply divided. The kind of argument I and a few others made was that whether we should break Section 144 depends on the strength of the movement, not just in Dhaka, but across the country. Oli Ahad, Toaha, Matin and Samad spoke in favour of violation. But, by a majority vote, it was decided not to violate Section 144.

No formal proposal had been taken to dissolve the all-party committee if Section 144 was violated. Abul Hashim said that if the students do not accept the decision of the all-party committee, then what is the need for such a committee. Neither Shamsul Huq nor anyone else was formally authorised to explain the decision of the all-party committee to the students the next morning.

The next morning, the violation of section 144 started at 11:30 am. The shots were fired at about half-past one. The all-party committee met at the Medical College Hostel on the evening of February 21 to discuss the situation after the shooting. The whole movement was spontaneous in nature, and it was developed without any special initiative.

Kazi Golam Mahbub was the convener of the All Party State Language Action Committee.

This is an abridged version of Kazi Golam Mahbub's interview published in Bhasha Andolon Prasanga: Katipay Dalil (Ed. Badruddin Umar, Bangla Academy, 1995.)

Translated by: Shamsuddoza Sajen, The Daily Star.
