Tumultuous history
2022-02-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Gaziul Haque
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/tumultuous-history-2955891

Until 1948, the State Language Movement was a movement of the intelligentsia and the students; it did not find its place among the masses.

This was because of the common people's unjustified infatuation towards the rulers of the newborn state, the lack of understanding of the exploiters' evil designs and the absence of a strong political organisation to build up the movement.

Despite the inherent weakness, the 1948 state language movement contributed to the emergence of progressive forces in the political arena.

The exploitation that was masked in 1948 became apparent in 1952. The people of [East] Bengal became critical both against the exploiters and their exploitation.

In a public meeting held at Dhaka's Paltan Maidan on January 27, 1952, Khawaja Nazimuddin (then Prime Minister of Pakistan) announced in the same vein as Jinnah did that Urdu alone would be the state language of Pakistan.

The announcement did not go unchallenged. On January 30, a student meeting was held at Dhaka University Campus and a huge procession was brought out after the meeting.

It was followed up by a more ambitious programme of a strike in all the educational institutions of Dhaka city on February 4, a public meeting in the university and a procession after the meeting. All the programmes were successful.

On February 21, the All-Party State Language Action Committee decided to organise province-wide strikes, meetings and processions, but on February 20, section 144 was imposed in Dhaka.

There was a meeting of 11 student leaders on the eastern ghat of the tank adjoining Dhaka Hall in the small hours of the night. The meeting was brief and historical. It was unanimously decided that Section 144 would be defied.

The attitude of the leaders of the political parties was compromising. They were apprehensive of repression. But the students had confidence in the people that unlike 1948 the people of Bengal this time would rally behind them in the struggle.

The evolution of the political situation by the students proved to be correct on February 22.

On February 21, the procession of the students was resisted with bullets, the ultimate weapon in the armoury of the ruling class.

As the news of the outrageous action of the police in Dhaka got around in other parts of the province, it provoked instant protest strikes and street demonstrations everywhere.

The whole province was in turmoil and the administration was brought to a standstill. In 1952, the language movement turned into a political movement -- and it went on to kindle the spirit of nationhood for the first time.

Gaziul Haque presided over the historic Amtala meeting held on February 21, 1952 in the Dhaka University campus.

This is an abridged version of Gaziul Haque's article published in The Bangladesh Observer on February 21, 1972.
