Month-long art exhibition on ‘Bangabandhu, Liberation War and Bangladesh’
2022-02-08T00:00:00+06:00 | Ashif Ahmed Rudro
https://www.thedailystar.net/life-living/news/month-long-art-exhibition-bangabandhu-liberation-war-and-bangladesh-2957016

'The aim of art is to represent not the outward appearance of things, but their inward significance' — wrote Aristotle to emphasise the significance of art. Abstract values like freedom are different to express but art can give them an image that touches our heart. Recently, there was an art exhibition at the Bangabandhu Military Museum titled "Bangabandhu, Liberation War and Bangladesh" that explored our glorious history.

The Museum

Honourable Prime Minister inaugurated the museum on 6 January, 2022. After a construction period of six years, the world class edifice was opened for public. The project was carried out by the E in C branch of Bangladesh Army. The Engineer in Chief was responsible for the project. Brig Gen Md Mahbubul Islam was the project director. Architect Ali Imam and Architect Bayezid Khandaker were the lead architects, and Nazneen Haque Mimi played the role of ID consultant. Spectra Engineers Ltd. served as the developing partner.

As you step in through the main entrance, you will notice a mesmerising yard of soothing green. A cleverly designed sculpture of Bangabandhu stands out along with other sculptures of soldiers. The water bodies on the sides blend into a picturesque look. Upon entering the main building, you will also notice the wide lobby with the Toshakhana Museum on your right. Walking through the Victory Arena (Bijoy Angina), you can get to the exhibition gallery.

The Art Exhibition

Some of the most celebrated artists in the country took part in this exhibition. The extraordinarily aesthetic 'Rakhal Guerrilla' of artist Rafiqun Nabi was being displayed on the ground floor. The bright and eye-catching piece reminds you that in an artist's hands, everything comes alive. The left wall on the ground floor looked very graceful as it donned two paintings of artist Hashem Khan about 7th March and the 6-points. As you stand in front of these spectacular paintings, you feel your heart overtaken by passion that can only be inspired by the historic speech of 7th March.

Another wall displayed eight artworks by artist Shahabuddin Ahmed; all of them about Bangabandhu and the Liberation War. A number of glass showcases as well as open showcases were displaying different sculptures. About 38 sculptures created by 10 different sculptors were presented in the exhibition. Tributes were paid to Shilpacharya Zainul Abedin and Potua Quamrul Hassan.

Nazneen Haque Mimi is also curating the gallery. Paintings done by many renowned artists were displayed here. Artist Mohammad Eunus, Rokeya Sultana, Nisar Hossain, Shahid Kabir, Muniruzzaman, Abdul Mannan, Mohammad Iqbal and many young and bright artists' artworks were presented. Some 90 artists and 10 sculptors participated in this exhibition. There was a portrait of Bangabandhu done by artist Ahmed Shamsuddoha that is exceptionally accurate. The painting reminds you what an imposing character Bangabandhu really was and it's a special one since the French Government used this portrait to make a stamp about Bangabandhu. 'Colours of Bangladesh' and 'Gallery Chitrak' cooperated with the exhibition.

The Gallery

Standing on a round water body, crystal clear glass encases the gallery. One can see through the glass, which gives the illusion of floating on water. There are two more floors underneath expanding both under the water body and underground. Nazneen Haque Mimi and Spectra took care of the interior decorations. The whole gallery has a marble clad floor and clear glass separates the ground floor part from the rest of the museum. Metal false ceiling covers the gallery along with durable and insect-proof materials to ensure that the gallery remains in pristine condition. The walls buttress a secondary wall that has been dehumidified and is acoustic in nature. As a result, there are no echoes. With perforation and 3d, it offers a complete protection for the paintings.

One can go to the basement using the stairs or the lift. The double high space and an eye-catching circular celling reminds you of how large the gallery really is. The paintings were displayed in such manner that each maintained their individuality.

Through a ramp and a small staircase, one can access basement two. At the centre point, there are two large columns that support the gallery upstairs. The whole place is highlighted with track lights and the lighting system is automated. The paintings are hung on metal panels so this multipurpose gallery can host any sort of exhibitions.

Small sofas and benches are arranged by the curator as sitting arrangements all over the gallery so one can relax, take their time and enjoy the exhibition. Digital gadgets such as signage, vertical signage, dual monitor kiosk is available all across the gallery and they offer information to the visitors.

Photo: Hasan Saifuddin Chandan
