Gone are the days of thunder
2022-02-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Dipan Nandy
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/gone-are-the-days-thunder-2962351

The Language Movement did not just come to be. Behind the historic movement, that brought about a turn of events for Bangladesh, are a million stories -- of people, of premises, of places. In this 10-part series, we explore some of the places and premises vital to the movement. Establishments that we've lost to time, buildings that today bear no sign of the glories they once played host to. For part three, we remember the glory days of Rasheed Building, the short-lived office of the Rashtra Bhasha Sangram Parishad.

Even before the establishment of Pakistan in 1947, Rasheed Building hosted the Suruj Jamal mess on its first floor. During the early days of the Language Movement, numerous organising activities were carried out from there.

This is also where the Rashtra Bhasha Sangram Parishad was established. Although it could only carry on activities for three months, the parishad's time there was significant in laying down the groundwork for the movement.

But with the passage of time, this historically significant building has become bound to the pages of history. Located at the south-east side of Dhaka Medical College Hospital (DMCH), it's now a branch of Janata Bank. There's also a mess for DMCH staffers there.

According to Language Movement researcher MR Mahbub's book "Ekusher Sharok", crucial activities surrounding the movement was launched from Rasheed Building, which played host to the organising activities of many educational institutions of the city, including Dhaka University, DMCH, Dhaka College and Ahsanullah Engineering College (present day Buet).

In a meeting held there on December 30, 1947, the parishad was formed, with Prof Nurul Haque Bhuiyan as convener. Among other members were Shamsul Alam, Abul Khayer, Abdul Wahed Chowdhury and Oli Ahad. Later, after it was expanded, Mohammad Toaha and Syed Nazrul Islam also joined.

Language veteran Gaziul Haque wrote on a meeting that took place at Rasheed Building's Tamaddun Majlish office on December 1947.

The meeting was attended by student representatives, professors and intellectuals, along with local members of Muslim Chhatra League, Ganatantrik Juba League and Tamaddun Majlish. The Rashtra Bhasha Sangram Parishad committee was formed at this very meeting, with the aim to take the movement forward.

Due to it being the parishad's office, Rasheed Building's significance at the time increased manifold. Participants of the movement, literary figures and intellectuals started frequenting the premises. As expected, surveillance on the building by anti-movement quarters also increased as a result.

On January 20, 1948, the building came under a heinous attack. On the day, a section of Old Dhaka's Urdu speaking community launched an assault on the parishad office, ransacking it and assaulting its leaders. The police later came in to lock the premises.

It also came under attack by anti-movement quarters after the Language Movement.

Given this, on January 25, 1948, the parishad's office was shifted to DU's Fazlul Huq Muslim Hall.
