Dusty memoirs of history
2022-02-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Dipan Nandy
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/dusty-memoirs-history-2964751

The Language Movement did not just come to be. Behind the historic movement, that brought about a turn of events for Bangladesh, are a million stories -- of people, of premises, of places. In this 10-part series, we explore some of the places and premises vital to the movement. Establishments that we've lost to time, buildings that today bear no sign of the glories they once played host to. For part six, we take you to Capital Press and Pioneer Press, the major publishing presses for the movement.

Capital Press and Pioneer Press -- two names that carry significant historical value when it comes to the Language Movement. All major publications of the movement saw light from these two presses in the old town. The first leaflet of the movement got printed from Capital Press, while the first bulletin got printed from Pioneer.

They weren't just mere presses. They were also places for secret meetings for activists and believers of the cause.

However, nothing much remains of these old establishments to tell the tales of glory. Capital still stands at Begumbazar, all worn down. Pioneer, which stood on the opposite alley of "Sawgat" headquarters in the old town's Patuatuli, was abolished some seven years ago.

A rusty signboard makes it even harder to find Capital at present. It's situated at 50-51, Begumbazar of Old Dhaka, which comes right after crossing the central jail.

Despite all the wearing out, successors of Ibrahim Khalil Khan, owner of Capital and an earnest supporter of the movement, have held the fort.

"Capital Press was a regular hangout place for poets and writers. The press helped form the Language Movement for what it was, and I was a regular presence at those sessions," reads a memoir written by AM Golam Mustafa, a veteran of the movement.

Poet and activist Hasan Hafizur Rahman was prompt in publishing the first leaflet from Capital, right after the shooting on February 21, 1952.

Reminiscing this memory in a Bangla Academy publication, he wrote, "Right after the shots were fired, Amir Ali, another person and I came back to Madhur Canteen and went straight to Capital Press. I wrote the leaflet, titled 'Fire on the orders of Minister Mofizuddin', proofed and got them printed. The press went all out to help us during those times. We went back to the university with almost 3,000 copies, and distributed them across Chawkbazar, Nazirabazar and other areas."

This correspondent recently visited Capital Press, currently owned by Hanif Imam Khan Shaheen, youngest son of Ibrahim Khalil Khan. "My father was directly involved with politics. My elder brother, the late Khan Ali Imam was in school back then. Both of them were directly involved with the movement," shared Shaheen.

"The Pakistan government issued warrants against my father and brother, after which they slowly had to curb their involvement."

"I had the press machine just a few days ago. I have given it away to a museum," he added.

Even though the press has lost it functionality, the family still holds on to it out of nostalgia and conviction.
