How would I make a film on the 1952 Language Movement?
2022-02-21T15:41:57+06:00 | Sharmin Joya
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/how-would-i-make-film-the-1952-language-movement-2967201

Although a handful of big screen projects have been made specifically on the 1952 Language Movement, there are many stories from that time that are yet to be explored. Marking International Mother Language Day, five contemporary directors discuss the kind of projects they would make, based on the legacy of Ekushey February.

I would focus on the role of women during the 1952 Language Movement: Rubaiyat Hossain

I think we do not have many films on the Language Movement because people have not found a cinematic vision for it. However, there are films on the partition of 1947 as well as the 1971 Liberation War. The importance of ethnic identity, which lies in 1952, can be presented as a post-partition event.

Before taking up a silver screen project on the Language Movement, I would conduct proper research, and focus on the role of women during that period.

I would focus on the emotions and challenges of the ordinary people: Raihan Rafi

Our mother tongue is an achievement brought on through struggle and bloodshed. However, while Liberation War-based projects are made throughout the year, the Language Movement loses focus after February ends.

If I make a film on 1952, I would focus on the emotions and challenges of ordinary people.

Sadly, people lack the eagerness to learn about the sacrifice of our language martyrs. Rather, these days, we are more focused on foreign cultural events, such as Valentine's Day. If there was no Ekushey February, we would not be able to express our love through our beautiful language.

My project would be contemporary, with strong connections to the years between the Partition and the Liberation War: Shafayet Mansoor Rana

I would prefer OTT platforms if I make a project on the Language Movement. It would be contemporary, with strong connections to the years between the Partition and the Liberation War. I want to focus on the psychological dilemmas of people who experienced the struggle.

We still tend to follow foreign formats, and do not have our own language of filmmaking. Moreover, we are not as culturally sound about the background of the Language Movement as we are about the story of the Liberation War. Thus, there are such few films about this important time in our history.

I would make an impactful film, and not limit it to any genre: Mizanur Rahman Aryan

In-depth films on the Language Movement will need proper budget, time, and research. For such an important subject, OTT platforms are ideal.

Since we are the only country to have fought for our mother tongue, I would like to make an impactful film on this subject, and not limit it to any one genre.

I would focus on the changes the Language Movement brought about, and our efforts to honour our martyrs: Raka Noshin Nower

The British culture is still strongly reflected in our daily life and work.

In the name of globalisation, we have somehow forgotten the power of our mother tongue.

If I work on a project on the Language Movement, I would focus on the changes it brought about, and our efforts to honour our martyrs. I want to portray the movement for a global audience.
