NSU holds virtual discussion on Martyrs Day & International Mother Language Day
2022-02-22T18:54:13+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/shout/bulletin-board/news/nsu-holds-virtual-discussion-martyrs-day-international-mother-language-day-2968021

North South University (NSU) organised a virtual discussion session on Martyrs Day & International Mother Language Day 2022 at the NSU campus on February 22.

This program was organised to highlight the significance of the language movement and perpetuate the memory of the movement to the new generation.

NSU Pro-VC Prof. Dr M. Ismail Hossain delivered the introductory speech.

Ekushey Padak and Bangla Academy Literary Award winning poet Asad Chowdhury was present as the chief guest. NSU BOT Chairman Azim Uddin Ahmed was present as the special guest. NSU VC Prof. Atiqul Islam chaired the event. The program was moderated by TV presenter and director of the NSU Public Relations Office Jamil Ahmed.

Asad Chowdhury said, "I pay my deep respect to those who have sacrificed their lives for the sake of the Bengali language. The spirit of the language movement had great influence on all protests from 1947 to 1971 including our liberation war. To be prosperous as a nation, we need to enrich our language and culture."

Azim Uddin Ahmed said, "I pay my deep respect to those who have sacrificed their lives in the language movement, the freedom movement, the democratic movement and the great liberation war. I pay my deepest respects to one of the pioneers of the language movement, the greatest Bengali of all time, Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the four national leaders. NSU has always played a special role in the patronage and spread of Bengali language and culture."

Prof. Atiqul Islam said, "The movement of 1952 served as the backbone of all movements and encouraged us to fight for getting an independent country. That is why we have to remember the contribution of language martyrs with everlasting gratitude. Communal harmony and secularism are very important for the development of a country. The better the culture of a country, the more developed it is."
