Colours of independence!
2022-03-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Sabrina N Bhuiyan
https://www.thedailystar.net/life-living/fashion-beauty/news/colours-independence-2987281

The month of March is special for a Bangladeshi for multiple reasons, one being the Declaration of Independence announced by the founding father of our nation that mobilised forces at each and every level of our society to rise and fight for our country. Bangladeshis in every part of the world sombrely remember the sacrifices made, the blood lost and lives given to attain our precious freedom.

To commemorate this momentous occasion, Farah Anjum Bari, renowned designer has put forward a capsule collection of outfits dedicated to the spirit of 26th March, Bangladesh's Independence day. A series of outfits have been designed keeping the solemn nature of the occasion, where hues of red and green have been given preference.

On a soothing canvas of white organza, strokes of red represent blood shed by martyrs while green motifs painted by hand is reminiscent of the boundless vegetation abundant all over Bangladesh's landscape. Among these artistic strokes on some outfits, there are patches of embroidery bringing depth and texture to the overall garment.

This is a capsule collection of four outfits that have been rendered in a soft palette of pristine white organza replete with designs, motifs and hues that are inspired from the patriotic spirit of independence. In terms of cuts asymmetry, evocative of the many different directions the journey to independence has taken, has been used to give a definite stylistic edge.

Bias-cut silhouettes have been tailored to perfection using expert craftsmanship and fine artistic sensibility to elevate each piece to a collector's item. Any woman holding the values of Bangladeshi nationalism close to her heart and intending to adorn her person with an attire symbolising the ideologies behind our struggle for independence will be excited to add a piece from this collection to her wardrobe.

These pieces can be ordered via Farah Anjum Bari's Facebook and Instagram pages.

Photo: Sazzad Ibne Sayed

Model: Antora

Makeup: Sumon Rahat

Wardrobe: Farah Anjum Bari
