Hoping new Pakistani generation would voice against its army’s genocide in 1971: Momen
2022-03-25T19:19:07+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/hoping-new-pakistani-generation-would-voice-against-its-armys-genocide-1971-momen-2990351

Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen today hoped that the new generation of Pakistan will understand its army's genocide in Bangladesh in 1971 and raise their voice for the perpetrators' punishment.

"Pakistani junta who committed the genocide went unpunished. It's very unfortunate and shameful. It's a shame for Pakistan, too. They should have tried them," he told reporters after attending a seminar titled "Bangladesh Genocide in 1971" as the guest of honour in the city today.

Ministry of Liberation War Affairs and Ministry of Foreign Affairs jointly organised the seminar held at Liberation War Museum Auditorium at Agargaon.

Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque spoke as the chief guest. Founding President of Genocide Watch Professor Gregory Stanton, renowned genocide expert Dr Helen Jarvis and Trustee of Liberation War Museum Mofidul Hoque also spoke.

Momen said the parliament adopted the resolution to commemorate March 25 as the 'Genocide Day', marking the day of the beginning of Bangladesh's glorious nine-month-long Liberation War.

He said efforts are on to get international recognition of the genocide and it was the day when the Pakistani army and its collaborators started one of the most heinous genocides of world history.

Under the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, the issue is now alive and the government is trying to get international recognition of it, he said.

"We believe commemoration of March 25 as Genocide Day is not only paying homage to the great and brave martyrs of 1971 but also creating public awareness against the genocide happened and happening all around the world," he said.

"Genocide Watch" has issued "Declaration in Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Bangladesh Genocide" and "Lemkin Institute for Genocide Prevention" has issued "Statement on the Bangladesh Genocide of 1971" a few months ago.

The speakers paid profound respect to Bangabandhu whose unprecedented charismatic leadership and long struggle helped in achieving our long-cherished independence.

They also paid homage to the memories of the three million martyrs of the War of Liberation, who sacrificed their lives for the cause of Bangladesh.
