President, PM pay homage to Liberation War martyrs
2022-03-26T09:05:49+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/president-pm-pay-homage-liberation-war-martyrs-2990816

President M Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid tributes this morning to the Liberation War martyrs by placing wreaths at the National Memorial in Savar marking the 52nd Independence and National Day.

The president first placed a wreath at the altar of the memorial around 5:50 am followed by the prime minister.

Then, the president and the premier stood in solemn silence for few minutes in memory of the martyrs of the great Liberation War in 1971.

Meanwhile, a contingent of Bangladesh Army, Navy and Air Force presented a state salute while a melancholy tune was being played on the bugles.

The chief justice, cabinet members, advisers to the prime minister, members of parliament, chiefs of the three forces, freedom fighters, foreign diplomats and high-ranking military and civilian officials were present at the time.

Later, Awami League President Sheikh Hasina, along with senior leaders of the party, again paid homage at the altar on behalf of her party.

After paying their respects, the president and the PM left the memorial premises around 6:08 am. Following their departure, the National Memorial was opened to people of all levels to pay homage.

After returning from the National Memorial at Savar, the prime minister paid homage to the Father of the Nation by placing a wreath at his portrait in front of Bangabandhu Memorial Museum at Dhanmondi 32 in the capital, reports BSS.

After laying the wreath, she stood in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memory of Bangabandhu, also the architect of independence and the greatest Bangali of all times.

Flanked by party leaders, Sheikh Hasina, also the Awami League president, paid glowing tributes to Bangabandhu by placing another wreath on behalf of the party.

Later, the she entered the Bangabandhu Memorial Museum and spent time for a while there.
