Recognise 1971 genocide: Int’l coalition of human rights to UNGA, other entities
2022-03-25T21:02:03+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/recognise-genocide-1971-intl-coalition-human-rights-unga-other-entities-2990406

The International Coalition of Sites of Conscience has stood with its founding member, the Liberation War Museum, in calling on the United Nations General Assembly and other international entities to formally recognise the Bangladesh genocide of 1971- one of the darkest, yet most overlooked chapters in human history.

In a release issued yesterday (March 24, 2022), the organisation expressed its solidarity with Bangladesh in this regard.

The International Coalition of Sites of Conscience is a global network of historic sites, museums, and memorials that are dedicated to promoting and protecting human rights around the world.

The 50th anniversary of the Liberation urged all institutions and individuals concerned with justice and human rights to officially recognise the Bangladesh genocide and its profound impact on Bengalis past and present.

"It is only through confronting the past with honesty and courage that we can acknowledge our shared humanity and truly flourish," read the release.

Despite ample evidence of torture and extermination, the lack of formal international recognition of the Bangladesh genocide has meant that - fifty years later - no Pakistani war criminals have faced prosecution. This lack of accountability undermines human rights for all and is particularly painful for Bengalis. Not only are they denied justice, but a central component of their history is being erased, making closure and more peaceful futures out of reach, said the release.

The Liberation War Museum has worked tirelessly for decades to raise global awareness of the genocide and honour its victims through a variety of platforms, including memorials at the sites of mass killings and the establishment of a national museum dedicated to the genocide and its legacies.

The genocide in 1971, a brutal campaign by Pakistan to suppress the Bengali independence movement, was carried out over nine months. Millions of Bengalis were displaced to India and at least 200,000 were victims of sexual violence.

While the reported numbers of those who died in the genocide varies, there is no doubt that it took a huge toll in terms of death.

Those who were targeted are also not in dispute: Bengalis, Hindus, intellectuals, artists, doctors, lawyers, students and others supporting independence.
