Nurture the spirit, ideals of Liberation War: PM Hasina
2022-03-25T20:20:39+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nurture-the-spirit-ideals-liberation-war-pm-hasina-2990391

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today called upon all Bangladeshis to let's not divide themselves and nurture the spirit and ideals of the Liberation War and participate in building a hunger-poverty-free, self-confident and self-respecting "Golden Bangladesh" as dreamt by Bangabandhu.

"Today is the great Independence and National Day. Bangladesh entered its 51st year after the golden jubilee of independence. On this auspicious occasion, I extend my sincere greetings and congratulations to all the Bangladeshi citizens living in the country and abroad," the premier said in a message on the eve of Independence and National Day.

She remembered with the most profound respect Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, under whose firm and far-sighted leadership, Bangladesh got an independent state.

Sheikh Hasina remembered the four national leaders who steered the Liberation War with their able guidance.

The debt of the blood of three million martyrs of the Liberation War and the self-sacrifice of two hundred thousand mothers and sisters will never be repaid, she said.

The prime minister paid her deep respects to all the fearless freedom fighters, including the war-wounded.

"I am grateful to all the friendly countries, organisations, institutions, individuals, particularly to the then Prime Minister of India, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, for their generous support during the War of Liberation," she said.

Sheikh Mujib remained steadfast in defending the rights and dignity of the Bengalis in return for any sacrifice, said Hasina.

She said the two organisations of his far-reaching thoughts are the Chhatra League and the Awami League, where he was deeply involved from their beginning until the end of his life.

At midnight on March 25, Pakistani troops started killing unarmed Bengalis in the name of "Operation Search Light", the premier said.

She said Sheikh Mujib was arrested in the early hours of March 26. He made the official declaration of independence before being arrested.

At the call of the Father of the Nation, the freedom-loving people of Bengal, inspired by the slogan "Joy Bangla", started fighting for the liberation of the motherland with whatever they had, she said.
