Recognise 1971 genocide
2022-03-27T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/recognise-1971-genocide-2991151

The global community should recognise the genocide committed by the Pakistan occupation army in Bangladesh during the 1971 Liberation War, said Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen.

Conclusive research by internationally-recognised genocide experts indicate that the nature, scale and organisation of Pakistani military operations demonstrate careful planning and intentionally designed strategies to destroy a substantial part of the Bangalee ethnic and national group, he said.

Momen's comment, which was made in a pre-recorded video message, came in a webinar titled "1952-1971 Bangladesh Genocide: A Tale of Gross Human Rights Violation", organised by the Conflict and Resilience Research Institute Canada on Friday to mark the National Genocide Day.

The genocide is yet to be recognised by the global community, he said, adding that Bangladesh has not received any formal apology from the perpetrators.

"This day comes with a mixed feeling for us," said Planning Minister MA Mannan.

"We remember the supreme sacrifice of our early martyrs who were brutally killed by the Pakistani army on this night in 1971. We are also proud of the fact that how Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman valiantly declared independence later in the early hours of March 26 and got arrested by the occupation army," he added.

Cindy Lamoureux, an MLA from Canada's Manitoba province, called for ways to educate people and properly recognise the history and genocide of Bangladesh.

One of the ways to do that is through exhibits in galleries like the human rights museum.

"Oftentimes an exhibit in the museum will create dialogue and a stronger understanding of our collective heritage. And Bangladesh and its growing community is a part of our collective heritage," she added.

Adam Muller, director of Peace and Conflict Studies at the University of Manitoba; Jeremy Maron, curator at the Canadian Museum for Human Rights; and Imtiaz Ahmed, director at the Centre for Genocide Studies of Dhaka University, were also present.

Meanwhile, in two separate events on Friday, the Bangladesh high commissioner in the UK and Bangladesh's permanent representative to the UN urged the international community to recognise the 1971 genocide.

The facts of the 1971 genocide are well documented and yet it has not been recognised in the UN discourses, said Rabab Fatima, permanent representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations, said in a webinar.

"We believe UN's mandate to advance prevention will be incomplete if the past tragedies, such as ours, remain unrecognised."

The programme was organised to mark National Genocide Day.

In April 1971, Sir Peter Shore, MP, who was the chair of the UK's Foreign Affairs Committee, moved a motion in the UK parliament condemning atrocities committed in erstwhile East Pakistan, followed by another motion, supported by over 233 cross-party members, calling for the end of genocide in East Bengal and the recognition of Bangladesh, said Saida Muna Tasneem, Bangladesh High Commissioner to the UK, in another event commemorating the day.

The envoy called on British parliamentarians to take a fresh motion for international recognition of 51 years of the genocide.

She pledged to work with British parliamentarians and academicians towards increasing publications on the Bangalee genocide in the British and international genocide journals.
