Rong Tulite Muktijuddho festival held
2022-03-28T20:54:22+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/rong-tulite-muktijuddho-festival-held-2992501

oikko.com.bd-Channel i "Rong Tulite Muktijuddho", a painting festival participated by freedom-fighter artists and their flag-careers, took place on 51st Independence Day on Saturday at the "Chetona Chottor" of Channel-i.

It was 16th such arrangement and veteran Rabindra Sangeet singer Rezwana Chowdhury Banya and her "Surer Dhara" took part in the musical session as in the yesteryears. The festival was also participated by a number of child artists.

Conducted by Oikko Foundation Chief Executive, Apu Mahfuz, the programme was live telecasted by Channel i.

Addressing the function, Industries Minister Nurul Mazid Mahmud Humayun congratulated and thanked Channel i and Oikko Foundation for arranging a programme like "Rong Tulite Muktijuddho" (Paintings on Liberation War).

"This kind of arrangement will build new generation with the spirit of the Liberation War," he said urging the children to follow the ideals of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Abdur Rashid Majumdar, chairman of Impress Group and Impress Telefilm Ltd Channel i, paid rich tribute to Bangabandhu. He recalled the glorious role of artists in the struggle for freedom and eventually in the Liberation War.

Freedom-fighter-artists Biren Som and Syed Abul Bark Alvi recalled the days when artists of the land had taken both weapons and paintbrushes for independence of the country.

The programme was also addressed by Prof Abdul Mannan Chowdhury.

The industries minister later handed over the paintings, painted by artists from different ages, to Liberation War Museum Trustee Dr Sarwar Ali. The income from the paintings will go to the fund of the museum.

Suriya Alam, Tanvir Ahmed Tanim, Jannatul Ferdous Tithy and Khurshida Parvin Sumi, Members of Oikko Foundation Board of Directors, were present at that time.
