Parliamentary sub-committee to prepare list of Razakars, Al Badars scrapped
2022-04-13T20:36:11+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/parliamentary-sub-committee-prepare-list-razakars-al-badars-scrapped-3004291

A parliamentary body was forced to scrap a sub-committee formed to prepare a list of anti-state elements--Razakars and Al Badar as MPs who were members of the committee were not interested in holding a meeting.

The parliamentary standing committee on the liberation war affairs ministry today formed another sub-committee to do the task, Shahjahan Khan, chief of the parliamentary watchdog, said.

After coming out from the meeting at the Jatiya Sangsad Bhaban, he said the previous sub-committee which was formed in August 2020 composed of six MPs.

Headed by Shahjahan Khan, also an Awami League MP, other members of the sub-committee were Major (retd) Rafiqul Islam, Rajiuddin Ahmed Raju, AB Tajul Islam, Waresat Hossain Belal and Moslem Uddin Ahmed.

While briefing the media, Shahjahan Khan today said the parliamentary body was forced to scrap the sub-committee as it could not hold a meeting due to a quorum crisis.

"That's why we have formed a three-member sub-committee," he also said.

The two other members are Jatiya Party MP Kazi Firoz Rashid and Awami League MP Capt AB Tajul Islam.

The committee chairman today said after the formation of the sub-committee, they sent a letter to all the deputy commissioners asking them to send a list of Razakars, Al Badars, and Al Shams.

"But most of the lists provided by the DCs did not seem acceptable to us. We have seen that there are no Razakars in many districts which was not acceptable to us. This is by no means credible," Shahjahan said.

He said they are also collecting the list of Razakars from the grassroots level in addition to the government management.

Sammilita Muktijoddha Sangsad, which is headed by Shahjahan Khan, a former shipping minister, is also collecting a list of Razakars.

The MP said a list of Razakars from 130 upazilas has been collected through Sammilita Muktijoddha Sangsad.

"We have sent the list back to them for further scrutiny," he said, "adding after scrutiny and discussion in the parliamentary body, we will send the list to the ministry for publishing it in phases."

The meeting was chaired by Shahjahan Khan and was attended by Liberation War Affairs Minister AKM Mozammel Haque, Abul Hasanat Abdullah, Major (Retd) Rafiqul Islam, AB Tajul Islam and Kazi Firoz Rashid.
