50 Bands Collaborate in Patriotic Song for Independence Day Celebration
2022-04-13T18:35:55+06:00 | Ashif Ahmed Rudro
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/news/50-bands-collaborate-patriotic-song-independence-day-celebration-3004206

As a nation, we Bangladeshis are a passionate lot. That passion was reflected in the patriotic song 'Priyo Bangladesh', which was released on 26 March, the Independence Day featuring not one, not two but 50 of the most prominent bands in the country in an unprecedented collaboration.

"The idea was to create a song where a few bands will collaborate. Then I started discussing the idea with Carnival and then BAMBA; who convinced me that if we are going to do a collaboration, why not do something that has never been done before? So, we went for the big idea. 50 bands coming together to sing for the Golden Jubilee of Bangladesh. It's never been done before", said Gazi Shubhro who directed the music video for 'Priyo Bangladesh' stating that originally, the music video was set to be released on the Victory Day, 16 December 2021 for the Golden Jubilee celebration but for some unavoidable circumstances that could not happen. As a result, it was released on the next big day in our national life — the Independence Day on 26 March.

The song was composed by Naquib Khan and Shahan Kabondho was the lyricist. Under the banner of TM Records, the project was executed through the collaboration of BAMBA (Bangladesh Musical Bands Association), who hosted the performance and Carnival Concept, who took care of the logistics. REDdot, led by Gazi Shubhro managed the visual and production. Gaan Bangla and TM Production presently holds the copyright for the track. Manam Ahmed had arranged the music for the number, which was recorded at Bappa Mazumder's studio. Bands like Warfaze, Miles, Dalchut, Souls, Artcell, Aurthohin, Shironamhin, Ark, Feedback, Cryptic Fate, Vikings, Lalon and many more were featured in the collaboration.

"It was a near impossible task. The shooting spot was at Fatullah (Khan Shaheb Osman Ali Stadium). We had to finish the shooting by the end of the day so we could not afford to lose daylight. We had 12 cameramen, about 50 crews and more than 300 musicians. Managing all those people together for a project this big in such a short time, it couldn't have happened without their co-operation and every single performer, every musician and every member of the teams present there gave it their all. And the result is this beautiful music video", added Gazi Shubhro stating that Hamin Ahmed, President of BAMBA was one of the key people for the project along with Sumon of Aurthohin and Tipu of Warfaze.

The track is available on the Facebook page and YouTube channel of TM Rocks.

Photo: Gazi Shubhro
