‘Envoys who sided with common people in 1971 example for today’s diplomats’
2022-04-18T21:37:20+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/diplomacy/news/envoys-who-sided-common-people-1971-example-todays-diplomats-3007236

The Bangladeshi diplomats, who responded to the call of Bangabandhu and expressed allegiance to the Mujibnagar Government before December 16, 1971, are the glaring examples of sacrifice and patriotism for today's diplomats to follow.

Despite knowing an uncertain and risky future for them and their families, they took the side of common people who faced oppression from the Pakistani regime for decades – something that will remain as inspiration for today's civil servants.

This was stated by speakers at a discussion marking the Foreign Service Day organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the Foreign Service Academy today.

"Let us salute those brave souls for their courage and of course, for their commitment to humanity and democracy," said Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen addressing the event virtually from Singapore.

On April 18, a day after forming the Mujibnagar Government in 1971, Bangladeshi diplomats and staff stationed in Calcutta, defying the oppressive and occupation regime of Pakistan, took over the Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner's Office and hoisted the Bangladesh national flag atop and thus established the first Bangladesh Mission abroad.

Minister Momen said eventually 65 diplomats expressed allegiance before the victory, which put the Pakistan regime under huge pressure. That also helped mobilse global opinion for the independence of Bangladesh.

Momen proposed that their names be written in golden letters in memorabilia.

He said the foreign ministry is now working on economic diplomacy and public diplomacy to improve the image of the country and turn it to a developed nation by 2041.

State Minister for Foreign Affairs Shahriar Alam paid tribute to the Bangladeshi diplomats for their sacrifice, but also noted that a few officials had taken side of the Pakistani regime in 1971 and were awarded after the assassination of Bangabandhu.

"So, our struggle against ill forces is not over yet. Such forces are still working against Bangladesh and we need to work hard to defeat them and achieve our goal," he said.

Former Foreign Minister AH Mahmood Ali, former diplomat Mohiuddin Ahmed, who expressed their allegiance to Mujibnagar Government, also shared their experiences during the Liberation War days respectively in the US and London.

Foreign Secretary Masud Bin Momen also spoke.
