Biranganas caught in bureaucratic tangles
2022-06-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/rights/news/biranganas-caught-bureaucratic-tangles-3049311

The absence of a timeline in the process of gazette notification subjects Biranganas to waiting for more than three years to be gazetted as freedom fighters, says a new report by Transparency International Bangladesh.

After being gazetted as freedom fighters, Biranganas have to wait for at least three to six months to start getting an allowance, the report says.

Besides, they have to wait for more than six years to get a house under the government's "Bir Nibash" project aimed at providing accommodation to freedom fighters who are not financially solvent, it adds.

TIB disclosed the findings of the report titled "State Recognition and Rights of Birangana Freedom Fighters: Governance Challenges and Way-out" during a virtual press conference yesterday.

The government started to issue gazettes declaring Biranganas as freedom fighters in September 2015.

Till May 24 this year, the number of gazetted Birangana freedom fighters is 448 in the country.

As per government estimates, members of Pakistani occupation forces raped and tortured 200,000 women during the Liberation War.

The report says in the Liberation War Affairs Ministry's management information system (MIS), there are various types of "mistakes" in the names of 89 Biranganas and in case of father or husband's name of 207 Biranganas.

Such misinformation leads to complications in getting further benefits.

Data for the research was collected between January and March this year.

TIB Executive Director Iftekharuzzaman said the existing process to identify Biranganas and provide them with state recognition as freedom fighters and other benefits is "very complicated".

"Not prioritising state recognition and negative socio-cultural mindset has left Birangana freedom fighters marginalised so far. Our research has also been found to be lacking proper planning and institutional capacities," he added.

Iftekharuzzaman also said this process too, is "dependent on bureaucracy".

The TIB report says certificates that need to be displayed for verification often complicate the process as a huge gap was found between the actual age and the age written on National Identity Cards in the research.

In certain cases, the collection of certificates from freedom fighter commanders is also challenging.

To avail of a house under the "Bir Nibash" project, the applicant must have land with a minimum length of 39 feet and width of 29 feet, which is particularly challenging for landless Biranganas.

The complicated process of gazette notification and lack of administrative support often subjects them to irregularities and corruption as well.

Moreover, there are massive allegations of extortion and bribery in the certification and housing applications, which often remain unreported for fear of further complications.

Due to pre-existing social stigma, Biranganas and their family members are often hesitant to reveal their identities. In its 10-point recommendation, the TIB report mentioned that a specific framework needs to be developed to identify the Birangana.

The report also suggested that the Liberation War Affairs Ministry assign specific personnel at local levels to assist in the process of availing all the facilities -- starting from the application process to gazette notification.
