"Pippa" showcases Bangladesh's Liberation War through the perspective of an Indian family
2022-08-15T13:03:53+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/producer-pippa-refers-bangladeshs-liberation-war-india-pakistan-war-3095501

"We are honoured to bring audiences this inspiring story of the birth of Bangladesh through the incredible journey of an Indian family on the frontlines", said Siddharth Roy Kapur, one of the producers of the much-awaited war movie "Pippa", which is set to release on December 2.

Announcing the theatrical release of the film today on the occasion of India's 76th Independence Day, Kapur and co-producer Rony Screwvala said in a statement that they are looking forward to presenting the film, starring actor Ishaan, to audiences worldwide.

According to Roy Kapur, "the Bangladesh Liberation War is often heralded as the only 'just war' in history because it was fought to save lives and to free a nation."

Oscar-winning A R Rahman has composed the music of the film.

"Pippa" (named after the Russian amphibious tank used in the 1971 war) is a heroic tank battle film that underscores the bravery of Brigadier Balram Singh Mehta (played by Ishaan), a veteran of the 45th Cavalry tank squadron, who, along with his siblings, fought on the eastern front during the Indo-Pakistan War of 1971.

The film, directed by Raja Krishna Menon, best known for Akshay Kumar-led "Airlift," also has in its cast Mrunal Thakur, Priyanshu Painyuli and Soni Razdan.

"The film, set in 1971 against the backdrop of one of the largest refugee migrations in modern history that then led to the liberation and formation of a country, is a story that must be told and we can't wait to unravel the scale of this epic movie to audiences world-wide on December 2," the producers said in the statement.

"Pippa" is based on the book "The Burning Chaffees", written by Brigadier Balram Singh Mehta. The movie takes its title from the Russian amphibious war tank called the PT-76, popularly known as "Pippa".

The film's makers also came out today with a teaser of the movie.

"It's a small glimpse into the film we have been working on and carefully nurturing. We eagerly wait to meet all of you in cinemas on the 2nd of December," Raja Menon added.
