India proud to be partner in Bangladesh's Liberation War: President Murmu
2022-10-14T21:58:53+06:00 | Star Digital Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/diplomacy/news/india-proud-be-partner-bangladeshs-liberation-war-president-murmu-3142866

Indian President Droupadi Murmu today (October 14, 2022) said India has always attached the highest priority to its friendship with Bangladesh and remains committed to realising its full potential.

Addressing a delegation of youth from Bangladesh at the Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi, she said "Our deep cooperation shows the importance that both countries attach to this relationship." She recalled her recent meetings with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in Delhi and in London, reports our New Delhi correspondent.

The Indian President said Bangladesh occupies a very special place in the hearts and minds of every Indian. "Our countries share deep civilisational links. We share many things between us including art, music and literature," she added.

The president said India is proud to be a friend and partner in the Liberation War of Bangladesh and continues to share the development journey, according to an official statement.

"It is important for us to preserve this spirit which continues to inspire the deep friendship between our two countries and our people," she said.

The Indian president noted that while there is already a lot of people-to-people contact between India and Bangladesh, the two countries need to do much more and the youth of both the countries can play a leading role in this regard.

Murmu said, "India and Bangladesh have a young population. More than half of India's population consists of young people and Bangladesh's demography is similar to ours, with a large youth population."

The president said the visit by the youth delegation from Bangladesh "is important as it continues the momentum from the last year's celebrations of the 50th anniversary of Liberation of Bangladesh, establishment of diplomatic relations between India and Bangladesh, and the birth centenary of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman who is as much respected and remembered in India as in Bangladesh."

Murmu expressed the hope that the members of the Bangladesh legation will use this opportunity to gain insights and experiences on various aspects of India, our diversity and the developments in areas pertaining to science, technology and arts.
