Lalmonirhat, Akhaura liberated on this day in 1971
2022-12-06T22:12:24+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/lalmonirhat-akhaura-liberated-day-1971-3189241

December 6 is a memorable day for the people of Lalmonirhat and Brahmanbaria's Akhaura as they were freed from Pakistan occupation forces on this day in 1971.

Burimari Hasor Uddin High School in Lalmonirhat's Patgram upazila was the Sector 6 headquarters during the Liberation War.

At that time, many non-Bengali Urdu-speaking people, mostly railway employees, lived in the town as the railway divisional office was situated there.

With the help of those people, Pakistani forces, landing in the district on April 1, 1971, launched attacks on Bangalee people in the following days.

In retaliation, Bangalee policemen along with locals attacked the Pakistani forces in Lalmonirhat Air Base led by martyred freedom fighter Mir Mosharraf Hossain, resulting in the deaths of many enemy soldiers and non-Bangalees.

On April 4, Pakistani soldiers attacked Lalmonirhat Railway Hospital, killing bullet-injured Mir Mosharraf Hossain, who was receiving treatment there, as well as four doctors, A Rahman, A Moktadir, M Rahman, and AG Ahmed.

Freedom fighter Abu Bakkar said, "Thousands of Bangalees fleeing from around the country gathered in Lalmonirhat, a northern district bordering India, and adjoining areas for safety and shelter.

"But a large number of them were slain by the Pak army and their local cohorts," he said.

The bodies of the brutally massacred victims were buried in a bush near the Railway Wireless Colony.

Freedom fighter Mezbah Uddin said, "Freedom fighters attacked Pakistan forces at different points in the district on December 3, 1971.

"Two days later, on December 5, the Pakistani soldiers started fleeing Lalmonirhat."

Freedom fighters declared Lalmonirhat free from occupation at the dawn of December 6 and hoisted the national flag chanting the "Joy Bangla" slogan.

Meanwhile, on December 4, 1971, freedom fighters with assistance from the Indian army jointly launched an operation. They fought valiantly till December 6 and freed Akhaura.

Bir Shrestha Sipahi Mostafa Kamal sacrificed his life while fighting there.

Freedom Fighter Jahur Ahmed Chowdhury first hoisted the national flag on that day in Akhaura.

Marking the day, Akhaura Upazila Administration and Muktijoddha Sangshad Sontan Command have chalked out several programmes.

On Monday, the Upazila administration and the local Bangladesh Muktijoddha Santan Sangsad began commemorating this day by lighting candles at Advocate Sirajul Haque Municipal Muktomoncho.

Floral wreaths were placed on the monument of the Liberation War Memorial around 9:30am today.

After that, around 10:00am, a joyous procession was taken out, and the national flag was hoisted in front of the upazila post office.

[Our correspondents from Lalmonirhat and Brahmanbaria contributed to this report.]
