A bond developed over our love for independence
2023-02-11T09:00:00+06:00 | Ashraf ud Doula
https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/views/news/bond-developed-over-our-love-independence-3244151

Those of us who were born in the 50s grew up with the Vietnamese's struggle for national independence. Vietnam's victory over French occupation in 1954 was a household story in the mid-and-late 50s, and we felt a natural sympathy for the underdog and fellow third-world country. Our interest in Vietnam intensified after the US launched in 1963 a full-scale war against North Vietnam, which began a spate of killing and maiming an umpteen number of people by indiscriminate bombing and spraying of agent orange from the air.

As young people, being proselytised by the global events of the 60s, we embraced the Vietnamese tragedies as our own and any reports of US new aggression agitated our adolescent minds. For instance, the My Lai massacre would never erase from our consciences.

The names of the great Vietnamese leaders – Ho Chi Minh and General Giap were firmly embedded in our hearts and minds. Little did we realise that the humbuggery of that January wintry afternoon at our youthful age indeed planted the seeds of patriotism in our conscience. And, only three years later, in 1971, when my country came under such an ordeal, it didn't take a moment's hesitation for me to join our Liberation War as a freedom fighter to liberate the country from the hands of the enemies. Indeed, General Giap's book "Dien Bien Phu", was my most valued possession during the Liberation War. What was even more fated was that one day I would come to Vietnam as the Ambassador of my country.

Deeper ties to take trade with Vietnam to $2b

In September 1945, the great leader and the founding father of modern Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh, known as Uncle Ho, declared the independence of Vietnam in front of a mammoth crowd. In his independence speech, he thundered, "We, (the) members of the Provisional Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, solemnly declare to the world that Vietnam has the right to be a free and independent country, and is so already. The entire Vietnamese people are determined to mobilise all their physical and mental strength, to sacrifice their lives and property to safeguard their independence and liberty".

One could find an echo to Bangabandhu's March 7 speech calling upon his people to be ready to fight the enemy with whatever they could lay their hands on: "The struggle this time is the struggle for independence. The struggle this time is the struggle for freedom. Once we have spilled our blood, if necessary, we will spill more blood. Yet we will snatch our independence. I ask you all to prepare yourselves to fight the enemy, with whatever you can lay your hands on".

In my mind, the above sentiments, expressed by the respective leaders in words coming from their hearts, are the philosophical foundation for building strong ties between Vietnam and Bangladesh.

In February 1973, the People's Republic of Bangladesh established diplomatic relations with the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and then with the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam – a formal governmental structure to the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam representing the Southern people. Right after that, Vietnam opened its resident mission in Dhaka in early 1974; however, it closed its Embassy in 1982 due to economic constraints. Vietnam reopened its mission in Dhaka in 2003. On the other hand, Bangladesh opened its Mission in Hanoi in 1993.

In the past 50 years, the bilateral relations have prospered by leaps and bounds, covering the entire gamut of cooperation: political, economic, cultural and people-to-people interaction. There have also been several high-level visits, including at the highest level, between the two countries over the years. These visits have added fresh impetus to the already excellent bilateral relations between Bangladesh and Vietnam.

The two countries share common membership in a number of international and regional organisations. They have also signed several agreements, protocols, and MOUs related to trade and other areas of mutual interest.

The bilateral trade between the two countries is currently valued at nearly USD 1.5 billion, which has the potential to surpass USD 2 billion in the next couple of years. Bangladesh's exports to Vietnam consist of pharmaceutical products, jute and jute goods, and scrap iron, while Vietnam exports to Bangladesh communication equipment, cement and clinker, gravel and crushed stone.

As we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations with Vietnam, given that we have multifaceted similarities with Vietnam, our relationship could also be expanded, encompassing several areas for mutual benefit.

Ashraf ud Doula is a former Bangladesh Ambassador to Vietnam.
