President, PM pay homage to Language Movement heroes
2023-02-21T00:15:05+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/president-pm-pay-homage-language-movement-heroes-3253276

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today paid their rich tributes to the martyrs of the historic Language Movement on the occasion of Amar Ekushey and the International Mother Language Day.

Both the Head of the State and the Head of the Government paid their homage by placing wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar in Dhaka at one minute past midnight.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina arrived at the Shaheed Minar premises six minutes before the clock struck 12:00am, while President Abdul Hamid reached the Central Shaheed Minar three minutes before the zero hour of today.

President Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina proceeded to the altar of the Central Shaheed Minar together in slow pace while playing the historic immortal song on the Amar Ekushey "Amar Bhai er Rokte Rangano Ekushey February . . . Ami Ki Bhulitey Pari?"

The president was the first to lay the wreath at the Central Shaheed Minar, after which, the premier placed the wreath.

They stood in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the Language Heroes.

Speaker, ministers, advisers to the prime minister, parliament members, chiefs of the three services, senior Awami League leaders, freedom fighters, foreign diplomats, high civil and military officials were present on the occasion.

Subsequently flanked by cabinet members and senior leaders of the party, Sheikh Hasina, also the president of ruling Bangladesh Awami League, placed another wreath at the Shaheed Minar on behalf of the party.

Later, Jatiya Sangsad Speaker Dr Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury and Deputy Speaker Shamsul Hoque Tuku placed wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar.

On arrival at the Shaheed Minar, the president was received by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and Vice Chancellor of Dhaka University Professor Dr Md Akhtaruzzaman.
