Homage to language martyrs
2023-02-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/homage-language-martyrs-3254111

Bare-footed, wearing black and white and holding flowers, thousands of people from all walks of life thronged the Central Shaheed Minar in the capital and elsewhere of the country to pay homage to the Language Movement heroes yesterday.

Humming the tune "Amar Bhaier Rokte Rangano Ekushey February", people remembered the supreme sacrifice of the martyrs.

The environment reverberated with the Ekushey anthem as the hallowed monuments got slowly covered with flowers. Areas around the monuments wore a festive look with murals, graffiti, and street paintings comprising Bangla alphabets and verses on mother languages.

The day is observed worldwide as International Mother Language Day. In 1999, the Unesco had declared February 21 as the International Mother Language Day.

On February 21, 1952, students and people from all walks of life took to the streets in Dhaka to protest the then Pakistan government's refusal to recognise Bangla as one of the state languages and imposition of Urdu as the only official language of Pakistan.

Salam, Barkat, Rafique, Jabbar, Shafiur and a few others were killed when police opened fire on their procession.

Taking part in different programmes, including discussions and cultural sessions across the country and in missions abroad, people reminisced the sacrifice made by the Language Movement martyrs.

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid homage by placing wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar in the first minute of the day amid tight security.

They then stood there in solemn silence for a while as a mark of profound respect for the fallen heroes.

Earlier, in a message on the occasion, Hamid said, "The Language Movement was the movement to establish the right of our mother tongue as well as to protect our ethnicity, self-entity and cultural distinction. The imperishable spirit of Amar Ekushey (Immortal Shaheed Day) gave us endless inspiration and immense courage in achieving our rights to self-determination, struggle for freedom and the War of Liberation."

Noting that the importance of the Language Movement in the history of the country's liberation struggle is immense, Hasina in her message said the foundation for a non-communal, democratic, language-based state system was laid through this movement.

Flanked by cabinet members and senior leaders of the party, Hasina, also president of ruling Awami League, placed another wreath at the Shaheed Minar on behalf of the party.

Later, Jatiya Sangsad Speaker Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury and Deputy Speaker Shamsul Hoque Tuku placed wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar.

On arrival at the Shaheed Minar, the president was received by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and Vice Chancellor of Dhaka University Professor Md Akhtaruzzaman.

Jatiya Party leader GM Quader, on behalf of the Opposition Leader in the Parliament Begum Raushan Ershad, also placed a wreath at the Shaheed Minar.

Chiefs of the three services, inspector general of police, the ambassadors and high commissioners of different countries, the heads of different international organisations, Rapid Action Battalion, Border Guards Bangladesh, wounded freedom fighters, Dhaka University Alumni Association and Jatiya Samjatantrik Dal (JSD), among others, placed wreaths at the Shaheed Minar.

Later, the Shaheed Minar was opened to public.
