Two Liberation war based films released today
2023-03-03T11:07:02+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/two-liberation-war-based-films-released-today-3261991

On the month of our Independence Day, two liberation war-based films, "JK 1971" and "Ora 7 Jon" were released in theaters today. "Ora 7 Jon" was released in 26 halls, while "JK 1971" was released in 7 halls.

Khijir Hayat Khan’s open letter to the Prime Minister

Directed by Khijir Hayat Khan, "Ora 7 Jon" showcases how the Pakistani army tortured the Bangladeshi people barbarically during the liberation war. It also shows how seven brave freedom fighters fought for their nation and saved their locality from the Pakistanis.

"Ora 7 Jon" highlights the escapades of a squad of seven freedom fighters, named 'Nishachar Bahini.' Reflecting on the grim situation of the battlefield during the liberation war, the squad carries out a two-day-long sensitive mission. However, tension arises when the mission extends to seven days.

‘Ora 7 Jon’ trailer depicts the tale of seven freedom fighters

The film stars Zakia Bari Mamo, Intekhab dinar, Imtiaz Barshon, Saif Khan, Khalid Mahbub Turjo, Shahriar Ferdous Sazeeb, Joy Raj, and Hamidur Rahman.

Meanwhile, National Film Award-winning filmmaker, Fakhrul Arefeen Khan directorial "JK 1971" is the first English language film in the country, which is based on the Liberation War of Bangladesh. The film follows a historical incident that occurred in France during Bangladesh's Liberation War. It depicts the outstanding heroism of French citizen Jean Kay.

Fakhrul Arefeen Khan’s ‘JK 1971’ wins Best Historic Film award at MIFF

Jean Kay hijacked a Pakistan International Airlines flight at the Orly Airport in Paris, on December 3, 1971. Having hijacked the plane, Kay ordered 20 tons of medical supplies and relief items to be loaded onto the plane, so that he could fly to Bangladesh and help the freedom fighters.

The film casted US actor Francisco Raymond and Russian artistes Derya Guvrosenko and Nikolai Novominski, alongside Subhra Sourav Das and Sabyasachi Chakrabarty in pivotal roles.
