Remembering the martyred intellectuals
2013-12-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Md. Asadullah Khan
https://www.thedailystar.net/remembering-the-martyred-intellectuals-3270

AFTER being subjected to two decades of exploitation and humiliation and with the ultimate brutality inflicted on a sleeping nation on the night of March 25, 1971, the people of then East Pakistan, although unarmed, rose in rebellion against the perpetrators. The founding premise of Pakistan ideology as also the objective of  keeping the two parts of Pakistan intact through a common religion was shattered. Though the whole country, meaning the then East Pakistan inhabited by Bangalee speaking people, suffered and witnessed torture, rape and massacre, nothing could stop its 75 million people from going their separate way after the fateful night of March 25, 1971. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the fiery leader, was taken from his house that night and flown to West Pakistan. To secure the supremacy of Pakistan the then president and Martial law Administrator Gen. Yahya Khan ordered his commanders in the eastern wing to start the cleansing process. It is pertinent to recall what some top brass in the 16th Division headquarters at Comilla said at that time: “We are determined to cleanse East Pakistan once and for all of the threat of secession even if it means killing two million people and keeping the province as colony for 30 years.” Just two days before our victory in the War of Liberation, the most heinous and sinister crime was committed by the Pak occupation army and their collaborators, al-Shams, al-Badr, and Razakars. They were deliberate, calculated and cold blooded assassinations aimed at crippling the backbone of the nation struggling to free itself from the clutches of the Pakistani hordes. The Pakistan army and its collaborators systematically rounded up the country's top intellectuals, including doctors, engineers, lawyers, teachers, litterateurs and journalists, and killed them in cold blood. Their bodies were thrown into the marshes in Rayerbazar and Mirpur. The occupation forces had reasoned that intellectuals were a major threat to them.  It was they who sowed the seeds of rebellion. It was from them that the voices of protest were the loudest and the courage to defy authority stemmed. So if the source of strength could be cut off, the remaining task of keeping the Bangalees under subjugation would be easier. With such a diabolical plan, the assassins worked and to a great extent succeeded. Now, 42 years after that terrible day, we not only mourn the loss of those brilliant minds, but also the intellectual and psychological void created by their untimely deaths when the country needed them most in the formative years. According to documents released after the liberation war, more than 100 intellectuals belonging to different professions were killed. The plot to kill them was drawn up by Gen. Rao Forman Ali, who was assisted by Brig. Bashir and Captain Qaiyum along with Bangalee masterminds like Ghulam Azam and Maulana Mannan, to name a few. Around November 1971, sub-zonal Martial Law Administrator Brig. Bashir began briefing the al-Badr and al-Shams about the plan.  From December 4, curfew and blackouts were imposed in Dhaka city to facilitate the plan. From December 12, the operations were in full swing. Similar heinous crimes were carried in different places of the country. The victims' crime was that they were enlightened Bangalees. They, after all, represented the main driving force of the nation. They were ardent patriots who believed that some day the nation would be free. They advocated the creation of an independent secular state as Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman articulated in his historic address at Race Course Maidan on March 7, 1971. By all reckoning, the nation became poorer at the loss of these best sons of the soil who were our pride. Forty two years after liberation, people with those ugly incidents of the dark days etched in their memory recall with shock and trepidation how the marauding Pak army carried out its “kill and burn” mission. Occasions like Victory day and Martyred Intellectuals Day, despite being recurring annual events, are far from repetitive experiences, and each year they carry an emotional load. Not only did we win freedom, we paid an enormously high price for it, and proved to the world that we are capable of snatching our freedom from an absolutely tyrannical regime. Unhappily, the saga written in blood and enormous sacrifice has not been faithfully recorded. Distortions were made, falsifications introduced and myths and false heroes were invented with every passing year. And this doctoring of history has been going on till date. Through half-hearted homage paid to the liberation heroes and martyrs, the significance of the Liberation War is not properly understood, but rather greatly minimised. Our best tribute to the martyred intellectuals can only be paid through whole-hearted upholding of the spirit of liberation in both words and deeds. The writer is a columnist of The Daily Star.   E-mail : [email protected]
