Zohra Tajuddin played invaluable role in 1971 war
2013-12-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/zohra-tajuddin-played-invaluable-role-in-1971-war-3279

The nation will remember Syeda Zohra Tajuddin, wife of the first prime minister of Bangladesh government in exile, Tajuddin Ahmad, for her invaluable contributions to the Liberation War. The observation came from President Abdul Hamid, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, ministers, lawmakers, and leaders of different political parties, including opposition BNP, yesterday as they mourned her death and reminisced about her contributions for the country and politics. The country lost a dedicated and patriotic politician, the president said in a condolence note. Zohra breathed her last at the capital’s United Hospital at 10:37am yesterday at age 81, her elder daughter and Awami League lawmaker Simeen Hussain Rimi told The Daily Star. She was born on December 24, 1932. Soon after the death of Zohra, the senior most presidium member of the AL, the premier rushed to the hospital. She got emotional while recollecting her memories with Zohra in the party after Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, along with his family, was assassinated in 1975. “Her death is a permanent loss not only to the party but also to the whole nation. And I lost someone close to me,” Hasina said. After her first namaz-e-janaza at Gulshan’s Azad mosque, the body was taken to the AL central office on Bangabandhu Avenue in the capital. After placing a wreath on her coffin there, the PM stood in solemn silence for sometime in honour of Zohra. AL leaders also paid rich tributes to their former colleague, followed by her second namaz-e-janaza there. Zohra Tajuddin organised and united the party, taking charge as AL convener in 1977. BNP Chairperson Khaleda Zia also paid tribute to Zohra, saying she left noble deeds throughout her political career. “Zohra Tajuddin was fearless and committed to defending the country’s independence, sovereignty and democratic rights of the people,” she said in a message. As a Liberation War organiser, Zohra was very significant for the victory of Bangladesh, said BNP acting secretary general Mirza Farkrul Islam Alamgir. “She proved herself to be an intellectual and efficient politician throughout her political career.” Alongside her active participation in politics, she worked with social and charity organisations. She was vice-president of Bangladesh Mahila Parishad and worked for women’s empowerment. In early December, Zohra underwent a surgery for her broken hip in a New Delhi hospital in India after suffering a fall at her residence in Dhaka. On December 17, she was flown back to Dhaka and was admitted to United Hospital. Her body was kept in United Hospital’s mortuary. She will be buried in Banani graveyard Sunday after arrival of her son Sohel Taj, former state minister for home, in the USA, said family members. Gonoforum, Communist Party of Bangladesh, Workers Party, Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal, Nagorik Oikya, Bangabandhu Sangskritik Jote, Mahila Parishad, Sammilito Samajik Andolon, Samprodaikota Jangibadbirodhi Mancha, and many other organisations expressed deep shock at her death.
