5 books about 25th March genocide and the aftermath
2023-03-25T10:03:10+06:00 | Ashif Ahmed Rudro
https://www.thedailystar.net/life-living/news/5-books-about-25th-march-genocide-and-the-aftermath-3280051

In Bangla literature, the liberation war is a genre by itself. The horrors of 25th March fall within that category. Genocide Day is an important day in our national history; the day 'Operation Searchlight' was executed. Here are 5 books about the massacre of 25th March and the aftermath that every Bengali should read.

Rifle, Roti, Aurat by Anwar Pasha

This is the first novel about the liberation war. The story revolves around a university teacher and his family as they attempt to survive and escape Dhaka following the horrors of the 25th March massacre. The novel successfully depicts the atrocities of the Pakistani army and the aftermath of their attack. The writer's narrative combined with his comments goes in parallel as the plot of the story progresses. The book is considered to be one of the most significant contributions to our liberation war literature.

Nishiddho Loban by Syed Shamsul Haque

It is one of the finest works of Syed Shamsul Haque. As a versatile writer, the author has contributed in many genres but his works regarding the liberation war are truly astonishing.

Nishiddho Loban's plot revolves around a young woman's journey from Dhaka to her native village following the killings of 25th March. The entire plot is driven by the fear and apprehension of what might happen next and it keeps the reader hooked until the last page. The successful captivation of the feelings of the masses during those days is done so well that it feels real.

Kalratri Khandochitra by Shawkat Osman

Known for his direct and smooth writing, Shawkat Osman encapsulates the events of 25th March in this book. As the title suggests, the book is about the atrocities of the Pakistani army on that cursed night.

From the dormitories of Dhaka University to Mohammadpur, Pilkhana, Shaheed Minar; all of Dhaka was affected. Even the slums were burned to ashes. From University Professors to rickshaw pullers; it did not matter what their identity was. The killing and torture were for everyone, and each event described in the book is a testament to the brutalities of the Pakistani army. If anyone is curious about what really transpired on that night, this book should definitely be on their read list.

Hangor Nodi Grenade by Selina Hossain

The author paints a picture of a remote village. The reader experiences a girl's journey from childhood to adulthood and eventual dotage. The book revolves around the life of this girl as the events of our liberation war soon change everything. The author successfully outlines the invasion of Pakistani army from a rural point of view.

The young men of the village joining the Muktibahini, the Rajakars playing their dirty role, and the sacrifices of the mass people along with the tortures and fear they had to endure; all of these are reflected in this work of fiction. You might be familiar with the movie of the same name which was inspired by this book but as always, there are some differences between the movie adaptation and the book.

Ekattorer Dinguli by Jahanara Imam

This book is essentially a journal written by Shaheed Janani Jahanara Imam. She was the mother of martyr Rumi who fought in the liberation war as a guerrilla fighter under sector-2. The book contains entries from 1 March to 17 December. The events of 25th March and the days that followed are depicted coherently. How it was like living in Dhaka with a family during that difficult time is illustrated from the point of view of a mother who sacrificed her son for our independence. This book will give you a different look at our liberation war.
