Poetry, my useless weapon
2023-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Shaheed Quaderi
https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/independence-day-special-2023/news/poetry-my-useless-weapon-3280716

(Translated by Kaiser Haq)

As bird flocks take wing at the rattle of Sten guns the broken-winged poems crouching in my notebook bury their faces in a dark drawer and lie like dead swans—or is it like an ancient rusty good-for-nothing pistol without a bullet in its chamber? Still, I can't get over my attachment. The day our neighborhood, swept by searchlights, trembled at the drilled terror of barking voices and heavy alien boots, this house too shook in fear though I hadn't any hidden weapons to give me away. But I, nervous, cowardly though I am, boldly shielded you from shiny bayonets and kept you safe from bonfires. Just as a guerrilla fighting for freedom straps a Sten gun to his thigh or warily advances, grenade in hand, I have evaded prying eyes to keep you concealed as if you bore the promise of a deadly explosion. One day, I remember, I dug a hole in the garden and tenderly laid you down. But when the heavy boots of foreigners trod all over you heedlessly as they came to pound on the door you didn't explode like a defensive mine.

O my serried words, if you still doze in silence like bedraggled crows on my notebook pages is it for nothing that I've put up with contumely in my vaunted lifelong passion for you? You are nothing but restless insomniac nights, you've given me neither royal diadem nor commoner's covenant— why do I still abase myself at your feet? Come, let us shake hands and part company, only let me plead one last time: If you can at least once roar like a field-gun.

Kaiser Haq is a Bangladeshi poet, translator, essayist, critic, and academic. He is a professor at the Department of English & Humanities, and Dean of the School of Arts and Humanities, ULAB.

This translation was first published in Selected Poems – Shaheed Quaderi , Library of Bangladesh Series (Bengal Lights Books/ ULAB Press, 2018).
