1971
2023-03-26T00:00:00+06:00 | Tarfia Faizullah
https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/independence-day-special-2023/news/1971-3280766

i.

In west Texas, oil froths luxurious from hard ground while across Bangladesh,

bayoneted women stain pond water blossom . Your mother, age eight, follows

your grandmother down worn stone steps to the old pond, waits breathless for her

to finish untwining from herself the simple cotton sari to wade alone into green

water—the same color, your mother thinks, as a dress she'd like to twirl

the world in. She knows the strange men joining them daily for meals mean

her no harm—they look like her brothers do nights they jump back over the iron gate,

drenched in the scents of else- where—only thinner. So thin— in the distance, thunder,

though the sky reflected in the water her mother floats in burns bright blue.

ii.

Gather these materials:

slivers of wet soap, hair

swirling pond water, black oil.

Amar peet ta duye de na,

Grandmother says, so Mother

palms the pink soap, slides

it between her small hands

before arcing its jasmine-

scented froth across her

back. Gather these materials:

the afternoon's undrowned

ceremonies, the nattering

of cicadas—yes, yes, yes—

Mother watches Grandmother

disappear into water: light:

many-leafed, like bits of bomb-

shells gleaming like rose petals

upturned in wet grass, like

the long river in red twilight—

iii.

1971: the entire world unraveling like thread your mother pulls

and pulls away from the hem of her dress. In America, the bodies

of men and women march forward in protest, rage candling

their voices—in Vietnam, monks light themselves on fire, learning

too late how easily the body burns— soon, the men whose stomachs

flinch inward will struggle the curved blades of their bayonets

into khaki-clad bodies, but for now they lean against the cool stone

walls of your grandparents' house, eyes closed as your mother watches

her mother twirl in the pond, longs to encircle herself in ripples

of light her fingers might arpeggio across green water—

she loves the small diamond in her mother's nose, its sunlit

surface glittering like curled hot metal she knows falls from

the sky, though never before her eyes.

iv.

Why call any of it back? Easy

enough to descend with your

mother, down

and down hard stone steps—how I loved,

she says, to watch her—

yes, reach

forward to touch

the sun-ambered softness

of the bright sari Grandmother

retwines around her body—yes,

your eyes dazzled by the diamond's

many-chambered light —it shined so, Mother says, though it's not you

she's speaking to anymore,

caught as she is in this reeling

backward—1971 and a Bangladeshi

woman catches the gaze

of a Pakistani soldier through rain-curved palm

trees—her sari is torn from her— She bathed the same way each time, Mother says

—the torn woman curls into green silence— first, she

would fold her sari, then dive in—yes,

the earth green with rain, the water,

green— then she would wash her face until her nose pin shined, aha re, how it shined—

his eyes, green

— then she would ask me to wash her back—

the torn woman a helix of blood

—then she would rub cream into her beautiful skin—

the soldier buttoning himself back into khaki—yes, call it back again—

v.

Two oceans between you, but still you can see her running a finger along the granite counter in the sun-

spilled kitchen, waiting for the tea to boil before she drives past old west Texas oil fields still bright

with bluebells. But tell me, she asks, why couldn't you research the war from here? Gather these materials,

these undrowned ceremonies— tea poured into a cup, a woman stepping lightly across green field

into a green pond—but don't tell her the country of her birth became a veined geography inside

you, another body inside your own— Oh Maa, she sobs. I miss her so . You open the door to step out to the concrete

veranda. Look: the moon is an ivory scythe gutting another pond across which the reflection of a young girl's

braid ripples. Tell me, you say, about 1971.

From Seam, a book in the Crab Orchard Series in Poetry, co-published with Southern Illinois University Press. Copyright © 2014 by Tarfia Faizullah

Tarfia Faizullah is a Bangladeshi American poet based in the USA.
