Revisiting memories of struggle and sacrifice
2023-03-28T00:00:00+06:00 | Arafat Rahaman and Dipan Nandy
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/revisiting-memories-struggle-and-sacrifice-3282476

You are looking at a large portrait of Bangabandhu, depicting his powerful speech on March 7, 1971. An audiovisual of the precise moment in history plays in the background, making you feel as if you are experiencing the historical moment in-person.

But your mood takes a sudden turn as you enter the next room. A dark tunnel leads you towards a bright light that momentarily blinds you. As you adjust your eyes, you realise the source of the brightness: a Pakistani soldier's jeep crashes through the wall, its headlights shining brightly.

You find transcripts that display conversations between Pakistani army personnel on how they planned operation searchlight.

You witness the violence and brutality the Pakistani army inflicted on innocent civilians on the night of March 25, 1971.

The Liberation War museum, situated in Dhaka's Agargaon, is where you can get this vivid experience.

The 3D visuals described above can be witnessed in the second gallery named "Our Rights, Our Sacrifice".

In this gallery, the dark tunnel provides a haunting portrayal of the horrors of the night. It showcases the sheer devastation wrought upon the country, with countless homes and businesses burned to the ground.

Visitors can witness the tragedy through an elaborate collection of photographs, videos, and symbolic forms, which may elicit fear and discomfort. However, this is the harsh reality that Bangalees had faced that night.

The museum boasts an impressive collection of over 20,000 monuments showcased across four exhibition galleries, designed by the talented architects Tanzim Hasan Salim and Naheed Farzana.

The museum's exhibition halls feature large photographs, diaries written by freedom fighters detailing their experiences on the battlefield, and letters they wrote, weapons they used, and much more information on their struggle, presented through paper cuttings and historic documents.

The first gallery named "Our Tradition, Our Struggle" starts with displaying maps of ancient Bengal and the Indian independence movement against British rule. It features artefacts from prehistoric times to 1970, including relics from the Pal, Sen, and English periods, as well as items related to the Language Movement.

Then the exhibition gradually depicts the revolts, uprisings, and the various stages of the 1971 war through different displays and exhibits.

The third gallery -- "Our War, Our Allies" -- showcases the Bangalee's struggles and sacrifices during the Liberation War. Visitors can witness the living conditions of refugees during the war. A physical tunnel is assembled with the images to depict their life.

The exhibit also highlights the Razakars' atrocities and international groups' support for the Liberation War. Photographs of sector commanders, guerrilla camps, and the Pakistani army's organisation offer a glimpse into the war's inner workings. Additionally, images from international media provide insight into how the world viewed the struggle for independence.

The last exhibition gallery -- "Our Victory, Our Values" -- depicts different phases of the Liberation War, including front wars, joint forces operations, and the killing of intellectuals. The exhibition also features upsetting images and documents depicting the inhuman sexual torture and rape of women by Pakistani forces during the war. Then it finally ends with the victory.

The artefacts were chosen and displayed in such a way so that they can reveal the full story of the Bangalee people's struggle for independence.
