How music galvanised the struggle for freedom
2023-04-02T00:00:00+06:00 | Md Shahnawaz Khan Chandan
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/how-music-galvanised-the-struggle-freedom-3286391

Music plays an integral role during every mass movement in Bangladesh. Whenever Bangalees wanted to be united to achieve freedom, self-determination and justice, music was one of the key factors that brought the nation together.

Music became a weapon during the Language Movement, Liberation War, the struggle for democracy in the 90s, and more recently, the Shahbagh movement.

Shabnam Azim, an associate professor of Dhaka University's department of mass communication and journalism, presented this very picture in her research article titled "Music of Politics-Bangladesh: A Journey of Musical Movements".

The article has been included as a chapter of the book titled "Music and Engagement in the Asian Political Space", published by renowned academic publisher IGI Global.

To conduct the research, Shabnam reviewed a vast amount of literature and interviewed cultural activists, organisers and eyewitnesses of the movements to understand how music influenced their activism.

Many popular protest songs were composed during the turbulent times of the Language Movement, and interestingly, many of the songs were composed not only in Dhaka but also in relatively smaller towns such as Netrakona, Pabna, Rajshahi, Sylhet, etc. Shabnam Azim Associate professor of DU

Many popular protest songs were composed during the turbulent times of the Language Movement, and interestingly, many of the songs were composed not only in Dhaka but also in relatively smaller towns such as Netrakona, Pabna, Rajshahi, Sylhet, etc.

She said, "Many popular protest songs were composed during the turbulent times of the Language Movement, and interestingly, many of the songs were composed not only in Dhaka but also in relatively smaller towns such as Netrokona, Pabna, Rajshahi, Sylhet, etc."

Shabnam, in her research, showed correlation between organisation of Bangalee cultural front and mass upheaval of 1969, which deposed the autocratic government of Ayub Khan.

She said, "When General Ayub took over power in 1958, cultural activists along with common people took to the streets to resist the autocracy. Three of the renowned cultural organisations which played a vital role in all future movements, including the Liberation War, were formed at that period."

"Chhayanat Sangeet Vidyanietan was established in 1961, Kranti Shilpi Goshthi in 1967, and Udichi Shilpi Goshthi was formed in 1968," she added.

Shabnam analysed the massive influence of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra in organising the Liberation War and in keeping up the morale of the freedom fighters by performing a wide range of songs.

She found out in her research that besides patriotic and war songs, folk songs played an equally important role in encouraging rural populace to join the Liberation War.

For instance, Bangladesh Mukti Shangrami Shilpi Shangstha, which was later featured in the famous documentary "Muktir Gaan", used to travel to places such as refugee camps, camps of the freedom fighters and places of unoccupied Bangladesh and performed folk and patriotic songs.

The research also sheds light on the influence of music during the mass uprising of the 90s and during the recent protest for the capital punishment of the war criminals, known as Shahbagh movement.

Shabnam said, "Shammilito Shangskritik Jote was formed in 1984 and played a vital role in organising demonstrations against the then dictatorial government of General Ershad. Various pop songs such as 'Rail Line Er Oi Bostite', 'Emon Ekta Ma De Na' and 'O Sokhina' depicted the struggles of exploited, impoverished people."

"Although publicised as pop songs, these songs silently became the weapons of protests and demonstration for the young generation at that time," she opined.

"Similarly, during the Shahbagh movement, the young generation became united by the songs of Kabir Shuman and Mahmud Selim. Various musical bands also performed at 'Gana Jagoron Mancha' to express their solidarity with the movement. More than 122 songs were composed and performed during the Shahbagh movement, which need to be preserved as historical assets," Shabnam mentioned.

Delaware Arif, an editor of the book and associate professor of digital journalism at the Department of Communication of University of South Alabama, USA, said, "Bangladesh is a pioneer in utilising the power of music in the struggle for freedom and self-determination. 'Concert for Bangladesh' is the first charity concert in the world that was arranged to raise awareness about a war and genocide."

"What Shabnam has found out in her research is very unique, and her work will make way for further research in this rather unexplored but extremely resourceful part of Bangladesh's history," added Delaware.
