Mujibnagar Day observed in Washington
2023-04-18T13:33:23+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/mujibnagar-day-observed-washington-3299851

Mujibnagar Day was observed at the Bangladesh Embassy in Washington DC on Monday, recalling the historic ceremonial oath-taking of the first government of independent Bangladesh on April 17, 1971.

The day's programmes commenced with placing of a floral wreath by Bangladesh Ambassador to the USA Muhammad Imran at the bust of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at the Bangabandhu Corner of the embassy.

Officials and employees of the mission were present during the time.

Later, the messages issued on the occasion by President Md Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina were read out by Defence Attache Brigadier General Md Shahedul Islam and First Secretary Md Ataur Rahman at the Bangabandhu Auditorium.

Afterwards, a documentary titled "Mujibnagar: The First Capital of Bangladesh", was screened which was followed by a discussion highlighting the significance of the day.

Taking part in the discussion, Ambassador Imran paid rich tributes to Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and the four national leaders -- Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed, Captain M Mansur Ali and AHM Qamaruzzaman -- who successfully led the nation's nine-month war of independence in absence of Bangabandhu.

The ambassador described Mujibnagar Day as a glorious and memorable day in the country's history, and Mujibnagar as a symbol of heroics of the nation.

Ambassador Imran also said the first provisional government performed their responsibilities with utmost devotion, efficiency and sincerity in leading the War of Liberation and mobilising international opinion in favour of independent Bangladesh.

He urged all to work together to build a hunger-and-poverty-free developed and prosperous "Sonar Bangla" (Golden Bengal) and "Smart Bangladesh" being imbued with the spirit of the great War of Liberation and ideology of Bangabandhu.

Minister (Press) AZM Sajjad Hossain also took part in the discussion and highlighted the significance of the historic day.
