1971 genocide: Demand for recognition on agenda of UN session
2023-06-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/1971-genocide-demand-recognition-agenda-un-session-3334761

The UN Human Rights Council has included the demand for international recognition of genocide committed by the Pakistani forces and their associates against the Bangalees during the Liberation War of Bangladesh.

The demand has been included as agenda item 3 of the UN Human Rights Council's 53rd session from June 19 to July 14.

UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres received the statement issued by the Bangladeshi diaspora organisation, Stichting BASUG (Bangladesh Support Group), with special consultative status of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of the UN along with Aamra Ekattor, Projonmo '71, European Bangladesh Forum, and Seraji Foundation.

The statement, which reiterated the demand for the "International Recognition of the 1971 genocide", was circulated in accordance with ECOSOC resolution 1996/31 on May 29.

It said the 1971 genocide in Bangladesh was planned and perpetrated by the Pakistan military aided by their Bihari and Bangalee collaborators. It is one of the world's gravest mass atrocities witnessed after the World War II, reports our diplomatic correspondent.

Three million people were killed, over 2 lakh women were sexually and physically violated, and 10 million people were forced to cross the border into India, leaving behind their ancestral homes and worldly possessions just to save their lives and dignity of their women. Also, over 20 million citizens were internally displaced in search of safety.

The statement said the act of evil committed by the Pakistan military was a foolish attempt to change the Bangalee race. The Pakistan army used organised and systematic rape as a weapon of war.

Also, the Pakistan army and its collaborators, namely Razakars, Al-Badr and Al Shams, under orders from the army high command, systematically killed intellectuals and professionals of Bangladesh. This spiteful and evil act stood out amongst the mass indiscriminate killings of civilians. This act was designed to cripple the country intellectually.

The statement referred to the historic documents and academic research in support of the demand and a bipartisan resolution tabled in the US House of Representative last year, calling for the recognition of the 1971 genocide in Bangladesh.

It called upon the UN General Assembly and other international entities to formally recognise the Bangladesh genocide of 1971 to give justice to the victims of the atrocities and bring the perpetrators to justice.

"We believe that only through confronting the past with sincerity and truth, rising above narrow political interests, we can acknowledge our shared humanity and join hands for a safer, peaceful world."
