‘He laid foundation for six-point demand’
2023-06-05T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/he-laid-foundation-six-point-demand-3337986

The concept of the six-point demand emerged from the writings of visionary economist Prof Nurul Islam in the late 1950s, said speakers at an event yesterday.

The event titled "Prof Nurul Islam: Perspectives from Different Generations" was held at the Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies (BIDS) to honour  his remarkable legacy as a renowned economist and influential figure in Bangladesh's intellectual landscape.

The event, chaired and moderated by Binayak Sen, director general of BIDS, featured the participation of ministers, advisors, members of parliament, economists, journalists, as well as his friends, relatives, and colleagues, who fondly remembered Professor Islam.

Prof Islam served as a teacher at the economics department of Dhaka University from 1955 to 1964 before assuming the position of chief at the Pakistan Institute of Development Economics (PIDE).

During his tenure at DU, Prof Islam highlighted the discrimination prevalent in the jute trading industry, which was the main crop of East Pakistan at that time, said speakers.

The esteemed economist passed away at the age of 94 in Washington on May 9.

At yesterday's event, eminent economist Wahiduddin Mahmud recounted his first encounter with Prof Islam in 1974, when Mahmud was a student at Oxford, and Prof Islam was invited to give a lecture.

Mahmud emphasised that Prof Islam was a mentor for multiple generations, describing him as a spiritual teacher of modern economic lessons.

"He was a comprehensive economist," added Mahmud, who currently serves as the chairman of the Economic Research Group (ERG) and formerly as a professor of economics at DU.

According to Mahmud, Prof Islam's speeches surpassed those of many Nobel Laureates, particularly in the field of development economics, where he possessed a bird's-eye view.

Mahmud also noted that Prof Islam demonstrated his ability to write about various economic issues, citing his articles on the East Asian financial crisis in 1998.

Matiur Rahman, editor and publisher of Prothom Alo, recalled Prof Islam's tireless dedication. Prior to his passing, four books authored by Prof Islam were published by Prothoma.

"Prof Islam never opposed anyone... He devoted himself to serving society, leaving his personal life behind," he said. "Prof Islam's concerns extended to economics, freedom of speech and democracy," he added.

Ahmad Ahsan, director of Policy Research Institute (PRI), mentioned that after completing his studies at Harvard in 1955, Prof Islam had the opportunity to join the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, he returned to Bangladesh and became a teacher at DU.

Renowned jurist and former foreign minister Kamal Hossain shared his first meeting with Prof Islam in 1954 at the Pakistan Student Convention in Chicago.

Hossain highlighted the significant discrimination faced by students during that time.

"Only five students from East Pakistan were sent to universities in the US, while the majority were selected from West Pakistan," Hossain said.

He commended Prof Islam for consistently raising his voice against such discriminatory practices.

Hossain also acknowledged that important decisions were made during meetings held at Prof Islam's residence in Dhanmondi in March 1971, a significant period leading up to Bangladesh's independence movement.

Roumeen Islam, daughter of Prof Islam and senior economic advisor to the managing director of the International Finance Corporation, World Bank, highlighted her father's commitment to data gathering to support evidence-based policy-making.

She also mentioned that Prof Islam had expressed thoughts on the role of the younger generation and artificial intelligence.

Mashiur Rahman, economic affairs adviser to the prime minister, said Islam tried to translate the six points demand into action and policy making for the movement of independence.

Among others, Rashed Khan Menon, president of Workers Party and a member of parliament; Planning Minister MA Mannan; Mohammed Farashuddin, chief advisor to East West University and former governor of Bangladesh Bank; Quazi Shahabuddin, former director general of BIDS, and Sajjad Zohir, executive director of Economic Research Group (ERG), shared their perspectives and reflections on the contributions of Prof Nurul Islam.
