PM mourns passing of two leading artists of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra
2023-07-14T19:57:10+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/obituary/news/pm-mourns-passing-two-leading-artists-swadhin-bangla-betar-kendra-3368906

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today expressed profound shock and sorrow at the death of two valiant freedom fighters and voice soldiers from Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra – its celebrated singer Bulbul Mahalanobis and founding organiser Ashfaqur Rahman Khan.

In a condolence message, the PM said Bulbul Mahalanobis was simultaneously a poet, author, musician, drama and reciting artiste, and presenter of art-literary-cultural programmes on television and radio stages.

She said Bulbul Mahalanobis was one of the pioneers in the cultural arena.

"With Bulbul's death, the cultural arena has incurred an irreparable loss. The famous artist will remain alive to the countrymen with her works" she continued.

The premier prayed for the eternal peace of the departed soul and conveyed deep sympathy to the bereaved family.

She said Bulbul was one of the artists who took part in the song 'Bijoy Nishan Urchhe Oi' (The victory flag flies high), which was broadcast on the radio to mark the historic moment of Bangladesh's victory in the 1971 Liberation War.

The famous artist also served Nazrul Sangit Shilpi Parishad as vice president, Rabindra Academy as general secretary, as well as many other cultural and social organisations like Jatiya Kabita Parishad, Kachikachar Mela, Udichi, Sectors' Commander Forum and Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra.

Bulbul breathed her last at her Dhaka residence around 2:00am (early hour of Friday) as she was suffering several old-age complications. She was 70.

In a separate condolence message, the Prime Minister said Ashfaqur Rahman Khan, a founding organiser of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra, and former deputy director general (Programme) of Bangladesh Betar was among the 8-10 radio workers who broadcast the historic 7th March speech from Dhaka station of the erstwhile Pakistan radio on March 8 in 1971 risking their lives and ignoring dire consequence of Pakistan military junta.

At the beginning of the Liberation War, he risked his life and joined Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra by taking the tapes from Dhaka Betar Kendra, she said.

Ashfaqur Rahman Khan was awarded the Independence Award in 2001 by the government of Bangladesh for his outstanding contribution to the Great War of Liberation, including his important role in narrating and broadcasting the historic 7th March speech and playing an important role in Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra.

"With the death of Ashfaqur Rahman Khan, Bangladesh lost one of its great sons. This fearless voice soldier, media personality and great freedom fighter will remain remembered forever by the people of the country due to his works, the PM said.

Ashfaqur, 81, breathed his last in Square Hospital around 8:30am today.
