2 stalwarts of Swadhin Bangla Betar pass away
2023-07-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/obituary/news/2-stalwarts-swadhin-bangla-betar-pass-away-3369111

Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra artiste Bulbul Mahalanobish and its founding organiser Ashfaqur Rahman Khan died yesterday.

The two stalwarts of the clandestine radio station were both suffering from old-age complications. He was 81 and she was 70.

Bulbul passed away at her Gulshan residence around 2:00am.

And just hours later, Ashfaqur breathed his last at Square Hospital around 8:30am.

He was awarded the Independence Award in 2001 for his outstanding contribution to the Liberation War, including his important role in narrating and broadcasting the historic March 7 speech on the Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra.

Ashfaqur was given the guard of honour before he was buried at his ancestral home in Shologhor union under Munshiganj's Sreenagar upazila.

Meanwhile, no decision was made about the last rites of Bulbul as of writing this report.

The singer is survived by her son, who is currently in the US. Her relatives will talk to her son and decide how to proceed, said her niece, theatre artiste and actor, Jayita Mahalanobish.

Multitalented Bulbul was a poet, author, musician, and stage performer. She also used to anchor cultural programmes on television, radio and stage.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina expressed grief at the death of two valiant freedom fighters and voice soldiers from Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra.

On December 16, 1971, Bulbul lent her voice to the song "Bijoy Nishan Urchhe Oi", which was broadcasted to mark the historic moment of Bangladesh's victory.

She dedicated her whole life to music. Besides releasing two studio albums, she also authored 12 books in her career.

Bulbul Mahalanobish was born in Bikrampur, on March 10, 1953. She graduated from Dhaka University and even taught there for a long time.

The noted Nazrul Geeti singer served as vice president of Nazrul Sangeet Shilpi Parishad and general secretary of Rabindra Academy.

She also served in important positions at Jatiya Kabita Parishad, Kochikachar Mela, Udichi, Sector Commanders' Forum, Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra Shilpi Parishad and many other cultural and social organisations.

She was conferred with Chayan Gold Medal, the Dewan Azraf Foundation Award, and Nazrul Academy Award from West Bengal for her contributions to the literary and cultural field.
