'Muktijuddher shotogolpo'
2015-02-23T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/book-reviews/muktijuddher-shotogolpo-3388

A meticulous compilation of 100 stories centering the Bangladesh War of Liberation has been done by  Litterateur Hosne Ara Shahed in two volumes. Each volume contains 50 stories of renowned writers of the country. Shuchipatra has published the two volumes, which are available in Ekushe Boi Mela. The price of each volume is Tk. 700.00

The collection first appeared in 2001, when it was published by Globe Library. The second edition was also published by the same house. But the third edition this time has been published by Shuchipatra. The editor and publisher both expect that the compilation would help the future generations to understand the ethos of the War of Liberation a little better.

Hosne Ara Shahed needs no elaborate introduction. She is widely known among the literati as an author, writer and educationist. She is former principal of Sher-e-Bangla Girls' School and College in Dhaka.

Her story Sarojinir Chhabi is taught as a text in Department of Modern Indian Languages & Literary Studies (Bengali), University of Delhi. Among her many books, Memorable Dhaka, Collection of Essays, Education System of Bangladesh and Liberation War of Bangladesh have received much acclaim.

She has edited, Dhaka University in the Nineties and Unforgettable Dhaka University , published by Dhaka University Alumni Association, in February 2006.

The first volume of Muktijuddher Shotogolpo contains stories from Ashim Saha, Akhtaruzzaman Iliyas, Abdul Gaffar Chowdhury, Abdul Mannan Syed, Abdus Shakur, Alauddin Al Azad, Jahir Raihan, Jahanara Imam, Dilara Hashem, Nirmalendu Goon, Bashir Al Helal, Purabi Basu, Borhanuddin Khan Zahangir, Bhashkar Chowdhury, Mainul Hasan Saber, Makbula Manjur and others. The second volume contains stories from Mahbub Talukdar, Ranesh Das Gupta, Mobarak Hossain Khan, Rafikun Nabi, Rabeya Khatun, Rashid Haider, Rizia Rahman, Showkat Osman, Shahriar Kabir, Shihab Sarker, Sardar Jayenuddin, Sirajul Islam Chowdhury, Selina Hossain, Syed Shamsul Haque, Hayat Mahmud, Hashem Khan, Hasan Azizul Haque, Satyen Sen and others.

The writer is an Educationist and Litterateur.
