Victory of a concept called Bangladesh
2013-12-21T10:09:48+06:00 | Sumon K. Chakrabarti
https://www.thedailystar.net/victory-of-a-concept-called-bangladesh-3389

The 'Butcher of Mirpur' Abdul Quader Mollah has been sent to the gallows. It's the only Islamic-majority country in the world to have tried and then sent to gallows one of the foremost war criminals in the nation -- who killed, raped and maimed many during the country's Liberation War from Pakistan in 1971. Justice after 42 long years. But to quote a recent poster campaign by the Nazi hunters -- Simon Wiesenthal Centre: "Late, but not too late." The Simon Wiesenthal Centre launched this campaign in Berlin, Hamburg and Cologne this year, to try and bring to justice the last Nazi war criminals living with impunity in Germany. Ukranian-born Simon Wiesenthal and his family spent time in several concentration camps; 89 members of his and his wife's families died at the hands of the Nazis. If Wiesenthal was the real deal when it came to hunting down escaped Nazi war criminals, then in Bangladesh this credit goes to few. And it starts right at the top with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. Don't forget for a second what she and her family were subjected to. Her father Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was brutally gunned down in a coup along with other family members. Yet she and sister have stood their ground and meted out justice to Bangladeshis, who were the victim of the worst genocide in post-colonial South Asia in the hands of Pakistani troops and their collaborators in the likes of Mollah. And then there are the likes of Shariyar Kabir, whose Ekattorer Ghatak Dalal Nirmul Committee (Committee for Resisting Killers and Collaborators of Bangladesh Liberation War) fought a relentless battle against all odds and terror tactics to identify and collate proof against the war criminals of 1971. But then came the Shahbagh Movement. A movement which has often been wrongly identified as the Bangla Spring. Shahbagh was nothing like the Arab Spring. Shahbagh was unique, not just in its very essence, but its character. In a Muslim-majority country, Shahbagh defied all odds and stood against Islamic radicalism; Shahbagh made us remember all over again that we are Bengalis first; Shahbagh brought the chants of Joy Bangla back on the streets and hearts of Bangladeshis. Shahbagh did not want to overthrow a government, but it made this generation of Bangladeshis stand up for justice -- justice for the inhuman crimes committed against their parents and grandparents. But there is a global outcry over the fairness of his and other trials held for alleged war crimes. How can Bangladeshis be 'blood-thirsty,' many have asked. An eye for an eye will turn the entire country blind, argued many. They have conveniently forgotten how millions of women were raped and mutilated, how minor boys and girls as young as two-years-old were thrashed to death in 1971. And have they also forgotten Adolf ¬Eichmann? After two decades, Eichmann, one of the top leaders of the Nazi party in Germany, was found hiding in Argentina. He was smuggled out the South American nation in 1960 by agent¬s of the Mossad, the Israeli intelligence service. He was tried and sentenced in 196 and hanged in 1962. Long live Bangladesh. Because it's not just the name of a country but a concept. A concept of people who speak the same language, a concept which led them to revolt against Pakistani domination 42 years ago, a concept where language comes before religion. And inside Bangladesh, the word 'Jamaat' needs to be treated with as much contempt as 'Nazis' are across the world. A recent example is of the 20-year-old Greek soccer player Giorgos Katidis, who celebrated a game-winning goal on Saturday by giving a Nazi salute to fans in Athens and has been banned for life from representing his country in international tournaments. Over the years 'Razakar' has replaced 'Jamaat' in practice while identifying those who carried out the genocide during the formation of the Bengali-speaking nation. It has been a continuous but subtle effort to delineate the essence; in reality though, 'Jamaatis' and 'Razakars' are both sides of the same coin. And they should be treated with the utmost contempt like the 'Neo-Nazis.' Nothing more, nothing less. Otherwise humanity risks insulting millions who laid down their lives and/or were violated in the barbaric genocide of 1971, all over again.

The writer is a senior Indian journalist covering Bangladesh for over a decade.
