'1971 Shei Shob Din', 'Aam Kathaler Chhuti' released in theatres today
2023-08-18T11:15:28+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/1971-shei-shob-din-aam-kathaler-chhuti-released-theatres-today-3397091

Today, Liberation War-based film, "1971 Shei Shob Din," directed by Hridi Huq, and children's film, "Aam Kathaler Chhuti," directed by Mohammad Nuruzzaman, were released in theatres.

"1971 Shei Shob Din" was released in 10 theatres across the country, and "Aam Kathaler Chhuti" was released in 5 theatres.

Prominent actress and playwright Hridi Huq will venture out in a new direction for the first time with "1971 Shei Shob Din", a government-granted movie that tells the story of Bangladesh's Liberation War. The film revolves around a family's experiences during 1971, providing a poignant portrayal of the era.

Nuruzzaman's 'Aam Kathaler Chhuti' awarded in Russia

Besides directing, Hridi Huq also acted in "1971 Shei Shob Din" alongside Mamunur Rashid, Jayanta Chattopadhyay, Munmun Ahmed, Shilpi Sarkar Apu, Ferdous, Tarin, Litu Anam, Saju Khadem, Sanjida Preeti, and others. Litu Anam makes a return to the silver screen after 15 years in this movie.

Ferdous, Litu Anam and Sajal play the roles of three brothers involved in The Liberation War.

Mohammad Nuruzzaman's directorial debut, "Aam Kathaler Chhuti", has been screened in various international film festivals before release. Based on Sharif Uddin Sabuj's short story, the children's film was produced by the director himself. Nuruzzaman believes that those who passed their childhood and adolescence in the seventies and mid-nineties, will see the life of that age in this film made in a nostalgic atmosphere.

People in Bangladesh have deep appreciation for their cultural heritage:  Hridi Huq

Along with that, a new generation will be able to witness the lost or declining rural heritage and our own folk culture. The international version of the film is titled "Summer Holiday".

Apart from producing, directing, and writing the screenplay, Mohammad Nuruzzaman has also done the sound design. Lion, Zubair, Arif, Halima, and Tanzil played the lead roles. The main assistant director of the film is "Adim," famed Yuvraj Shamim.
