I cried every time watching ‘1971 Shei Shob Din’: Sanjida Preeti
2023-08-24T17:04:42+06:00 | Shah Alam Shazu
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/tv-film/news/i-cried-every-time-watching-1971-shei-shob-din-sanjida-preeti-3402036

For the last 21 years, Sanjida Preeti has been a staple part of the theatre stage. Not only that, she has also attained immense love from audiences for her adoring portrayals of TV characters. On August 18, "1971 Shei Shob Din", directed by Hridi Huq, was released starring Preeti in a pivotal role. As usual, her acting has been appraised positively, much like her previous starrer, "Mridha Bonam Mridha".

A member of the prestigious theatre troupe, Prachyanat, Preeti managed time to indulge in a chat with The Daily Star.

Your last film premiered only a week ago, how many times have you watched it so far?

Since its release, I've watched it three times already. I might watch it again on August 24 and I must say, I've cried every time. So have other people, who've watched the film. You see this is a Liberation War film, such emotions are expected to flow. I'm no exception.

You've shared the screen with other talented artistes as yourself. How was that experience?

I've indeed interacted with a plethora of gifted co-stars and, loved their work. It was an amalgamation of talents from different generations, which is rare. Each of them gave their best from their positions.

How did the audiences react to your portrayal of Binti?

All of my peers, friends and family showered me with praises. I've received appreciation even before film's release, when the song "Jachchho Kothay" was released. My character was present in the music video.

On a technical note, its difficult to judge your own work by yourself.  I always feel like I could've done better. I guess the judgement is ultimately up to the audiences.

On that note, how difficult was it to portray a character from 1971?

It was difficult but Hridi Huq made it easier, so did the art director and everyone related with creating the environment. The goal was to transport everyone to that time.

Stars Unite to make astounding Liberation War film

Are you still acting regularly on stage?

Indeed, have been for the past 21 years with Prachyanat. The last two stage productions that I performed in were "Agunjatra" and "Achalayatan".
