Mass grave of 7 martyrs lies neglected
2023-09-03T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Mymensingh
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/mass-grave-7-martyrs-lies-neglected-3409671

A mass graveyard of seven valiant freedom fighters, who embraced martyrdom during the Liberation War in 1971, in Netrakona's Kalmakanda upazila is on the verge of being eroded by the Ganeshwari river.

Freedom fighter Abdul Khaleque Talukder, also chairman of Kalmakanda Upazila Parishad, said seven freedom fighters---Dr Abdul Aziz and Mohammad Fazlul Haque of Netrakona, Mohammad Yaar Mahmud, Bhabotosh Chandra Das, Dijendra Chandra Biswas and Mohammad Nuruzzaman of Mymensingh, and Jamal Uddin of Jamalpur– borrowed martyrdom during a fierce battle with the Pakistani occupation forces at Nazirpur Bazar in Kalmakanda on July 26 in 1971.

Later, fellow freedom fighters took their bodies and buried them in bordering Phulbari area.

Every year the upazila administration and local freedom fighters observe the day as 'Historic Nazirpur Day' with due respect, said Saidur Rahman, chairman of Lengura Union Parishad (UP).

But continuous erosion by the Ganeshwari river in the last couple of years has put the graveyard at risk as the paved road along the river is eroding every year, the chairman added.

At present, the graveyard is pretty close to the river and if immediate steps are not taken to stop the erosion right now, it may devour in the river soon, a number of locals said.

Schoolteacher Ashraf Ali said such historic places should be preserved for the better interest of the younger generations.

Local people have been urging the authorities concerned to build a guide wall along the Ganeshwari river to protect the martyrs' graves from further erosion, he said.

They have also been demanding to construct a museum at the place with complete information about the seven martyrs, their memorabilia and history of other freedom fighters in the region.

Kalmakanda LGED Upazila Engineer Shuvra Deb Chakraborty said they have sent a project proposal to repair the damaged road, stretching from Lengura Bazar to the Martyrs' Graveyard, and construct guide walls at different risky spots of the road.
