Stay vigilant to protect spirit of Liberation War: PM
2023-09-16T00:00:00+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/stay-vigilant-protect-spirit-liberation-war-pm-3419896

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday urged the people to remain vigilant so that no one can distort the spirit of the Liberation War anymore in the future.

"The spirit of the great liberation war is very important for us. The people should be awakened with the spirit and the country should be developed following the ideals of the Liberation War. I would like to make a call to stay vigilant so that none can distort it (the spirit), which had been earned through the victory of this liberation war, anymore in the future," she said.

The premier was addressing the inauguration of a special arts exhibition titled "A Retrospective 1973-2023" with the selected paintings of Independence Award-winning and internationally acclaimed artist Shahabuddin Ahmed at Bangladesh National Museum in the city's Shahbagh area.

Some 140 selected artworks of Shahabuddin are being displayed in the month-long solo art exhibition at Nalini Kanta Bhattasali Gallery of the National Museum.

Hasina said paintings touch the hearts of the people. "The artworks can awaken patriotism and a spirit among the people," she said.

The poets, artists, litterateurs and writers have played a pivotal role in retaining the spirit in their works after everything -spirit, ideals and history-- of the Liberation War was erased following the assassination of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in 1975, she said.

"Since they kept up the spirit at that time, we, the politicians, later restored democracy and ensured the voting rights of the people through political ways and finally took steps to build the country in line with the spirit of the Liberation War," she said.

The prime minister said now the spirit of the Liberation war started returning to the young generation of the country, which is a big achievement.

Wishing the month-long exhibition a success, she said the exhibition of Shahabuddin Ahmed's paintings is very important as his artworks reflect the nature of Bangladesh, the condition of the country's people, and the spirit of the Liberation War.

The premier expressed gratitude to Shahabuddin Ahmed as he has brightened the image of Bangladesh in the international arena through his paintings.

Bangabandhu's youngest daughter Sheikh Rehana was present in the inaugural ceremony presided over by State Minister for Cultural Affairs KM Khalid.

In the function, the prime minister also unveiled the cover of a book titled "Shahabuddin, A Retrospective 1973-2023."

President of the Board of Trustees of Bangladesh National Museum Prof AAMS Arefin Siddique, Painter Shahabuddin Ahmed, French Ambassador to Bangladesh Marie Masdupuy, Cultural Affairs Secretary Khalil Ahmed and Director General of Bangladesh National Museum Md Kamruzzaman spoke on the occasion.
