A genocide being allowed to happen
2023-10-14T16:47:19+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/editorial/news/genocide-being-allowed-happen-3442936

As we witness the unrelenting and brutal bombardment of Gaza by Israeli airstrikes, which continue to take Palestinian lives, the world should be reminded that the present war is between an organisation and a state. Hamas – which has carried out deadly attacks, killed more than 1,300 people in Israel, and has taken around 150 hostages – does not represent the totality of Palestine. Thus, the merciless pulverisation of the densely populated Gaza strip that has already taken over 2,000 Palestinian lives (over 700 of whom are children), along with cutting of water, electricity, and food supply, and humanitarian aid, as retaliation against these attacks, are unconscionable acts and violations of international law. An AFP report says that Israeli artillery goes into action against the Gaza strip every 30 seconds.

The world cannot afford another war

Giving a 24-hour ultimatum to Palestinians living in the north to evacuate before a ground offensive was nothing short of a death sentence. Tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians have fled the area while many others decided to remain because they had nowhere else to go. Health officials report that Israeli air raids on convoys attempting to leave Gaza city have resulted in the deaths of at least 320 Palestinians, including women and children. How can such blatant brutality be tolerated by the world?

Western media’s ahistorical reporting around Palestine-Israel

Most Western powers have demonised Hamas for its horrific attacks. But why is Israel not even criticised for what can only be described as a vengeful retribution on civilians, many of them children? It is eerily similar to the consequences of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, during which the Nazis killed around 13,000 Jews to "teach them a lesson" through excessive violence and death, for their resistance effort. Why have Western powers unhesitatingly condemned the attacks of the Hamas, but wilfully ignored the ongoing massacre of civilians in Gaza by Israel, right before their eyes? In fact, the US is boosting military aid to Israel.

The savagery of the war against the Palestinian people

This never-ending cycle of violence will only lead to more desperation, deaths, and destruction. Can the Western world forgive itself for standing by while a state unleashes its wrath on civilians? Can it erase the fact of Palestinians being under siege, deprived of their land and basic rights, for over seven decades? Under international law, is it justifiable for a state to carry out a campaign of killing civilians, displacing the already displaced, and demolishing all structures in the name of protecting its own citizens? By allowing these atrocities to happen with no consequences, the West has exposed its moral bankruptcy. The US, the EU, the UK, and Canada must join others to call for immediate ceasefire, safe entry of humanitarian aid into Gaza, and concerted efforts to bring about a two-state solution – starting with an end to the illegal occupation of Palestinian land.
