Mujibnagar Day to be observed tomorrow
2024-04-16T13:43:17+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/mujibnagar-day-be-observed-tomorrow-3588211

The historic Mujibnagar Day will be observed tomorrow.

Meherpur district administration and the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs have completed all preparations for the occasion.

On this day in 1971, the first government of Bangladesh was sworn in at Amrakanon in Baidyanath Tala, Mujibnagar upazila, Meherpur.

Mujibnagar Upazila Nirbahi Officer Md Khairul Islam said, "We have taken elaborate preparations to welcome war heroes, ministers, and visitors from all over the country. Cleaning, painting various murals and installations, and all other preparations have been completed. Uninterrupted electricity, safe drinking water, and adequate temporary toilets have been arranged."

Meherpur Police Superintendent SM Nazmul Haq said, "The district police have undertaken a comprehensive programme to maintain law and order on the occasion of the historic Mujibnagar Day. The main stage of Mujibnagar will be monitored through CCTV cameras at various points. A police control room has been set up to provide immediate security to the visitors. Traffic management has been tightened. We are working to ensure that everyone can celebrate the historic day."

Extensive preparations have also been made by the district Awami League. Meherpur District Awami League President and Minister for Public Administration Farhad Hossain MP said, "We are ready to celebrate the day with due dignity. For the last few years, we have celebrated the day on a small scale due to the coronavirus pandemic and Ramadan. But this time we have taken the initiative to celebrate the day in a grand manner."

Farhad will preside over the Mujibnagar Day programme.

The chief guest will be Liberation War Minister Mozammel Haque.

The day's programmes will begin with the hoisting of the national flag at 9:00am at the memorial, followed by a wreath-laying ceremony.

After the flag hoisting, Awami League central leaders, ministers, and local leaders will participate in a discussion on the significance of the day at Sheikh Hasina Mancha.
