Liberation war affairs secretary made OSD
2014-08-18T17:21:56+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/liberation-war-affairs-secretary-made-osd-37637

Liberation War Affairs Secretary KH Masud Siddiqui has been made officer on special duty (OSD).

The public administration ministry issued a gazette notification in this regard today.

According to the notice, MA Hannan, additional secretary to the environment and forests ministry, has been made the acting secretary to the liberation war affairs ministry.

Masud Siddiqui faces allegations of obtaining freedom fighters' certificate through fake documents and anomalies in purchasing sub-par shields given to foreign friends in recognition of their contribution to the 1971 Liberation War.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina approved the move on Thursday.

Siddiqui, who was supposed to go on a one-year leave preparatory to retirement (LPR) from October 30, used the freedom fighters' certificate attained through forged documents last year to have his service tenure extended.

The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) is currently investigating the allegation.

In November 2012, the government extended the retirement age of freedom fighters from 59 years to 60.

The ACC is also looking into the same allegation against Khandakar Shawkat Hossain, expatriates' welfare and overseas employment secretary; Niaz Uddin Mia, health secretary; AKM Amir Hossain, Public Service Commission secretary; Molla Waheeduzzaman, privatisation commission chairman; and Md Abul Kashem Talukder, former joint secretary of liberation war affairs ministry (now an OSD).

The ministry has so far revoked freedom fighters' certificates of 182 public servants for obtaining those through forgery, and is investigating another 5,000 people, including 300 government employees on the same charge.

Siddiqui was also accused by a government probe body of involvement in purchasing subpar crests awarded to foreign individuals and organisations for their contribution to the country's liberation.
