Govt programmes announced for Martyred Intellectuals Day, Victory Day
2024-12-11T21:00:06+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/govt-programmes-announced-martyred-intellectuals-day-victory-day-3773961

The Ministry of Liberation War Affairs has announced a package of programmes to commemorate Shaheed Intellectuals' Day and Victory Day.

Liberation War Affairs Adviser Farooq E Azam shared the details of the programmes at a press conference at the ministry today.

The Shaheed Intellectuals Day is observed on December 14 to pay homage to dozens of intellectuals who were slain by the collaborators of the occupation Pakistani army just days before the nation gained victory in the nine-month War of Liberation in 1971.

The Victory Day is celebrated on December 16.

Victory Day to feature nationwide fairs instead of traditional parade

The adviser said President Mohammed Shahabuddin and Chief Adviser Dr Muhammad Yunus will lay wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial in Mirpur on December 14.

The event will be broadcast live on Bangladesh Television and private TV channels.

Led by the adviser, family members of the martyrs and wounded freedom fighters will lay wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial at Mirpur at 7:22am and the Rayerbazar mass killing field at 8:30am.

Also from 8:30am onwards, political and social organisations, along with people from all walks of life, will also pay their respects by laying wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial.

On this day, the president and the chief adviser will deliver special messages to the nation. Discussion programmes emphasising the significance of the day will be held at district and upazila levels. Bangladesh Radio, Bangladesh Television and private TV channels will air special programmes highlighting the sacrifices of the intellectuals for national independence.

Moreover, special prayers and services will be held at mosques, temples, churches, pagodas, and other places of worship across the country on the Martyred Intellectuals Day.

To preserve the sanctity of the day, the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs has requested the public to refrain from using microphones or loudspeakers in the vicinity of the memorial at Mirpur.

On December 16, the day will begin with a 31-gun salute at dawn in Dhaka.

Martyred Intellectuals Day yet to be nationally recognised

At sunrise, President Md. Sahabuddin and Chief Advisor Dr. Muhammad Yunus will lay wreaths at the National Memorial in Savar. Following that, under the leadership of the ministry's adviser, families of the country's highest war heroes, wounded freedom fighters, and other distinguished freedom fighters will also pay their tributes.

Foreign diplomats based in Bangladesh, along with political and social organisations, as well as the general public, will also lay wreaths in honour of the martyrs.

On this day, the national flag will be hoisted at all government, semi-government, autonomous, and private buildings, and important buildings and landmarks will be illuminated. The main streets and roundabouts in Dhaka and other cities will be adorned with national flags.

The president and the chief adviser will deliver messages on the occasion, and special supplements highlighting the significance of the day will be published in newspapers.

On this occasion, various social and cultural organisations, including the Bangladesh Shilpakala Academy, Bangla Academy, National Museum, Liberation War Museum, and Bangladesh Children's Academy, will organize discussions, cultural programmes, drawing competitions, essay writing contests, sports events, and screenings of Liberation War-related documentaries.

Victory fairs showcasing local and indigenous crafts will be organised in all districts and upazilas throughout the country. Drawing competitions and cultural events based on the Liberation War will be held for children. Bangladesh embassies abroad will also organise programmes to highlight the significance of the day.

In the afternoon, the president will host a reception for the families of the Bir Shreshthas at Bangabhaban. In addition, receptions will be held for freedom fighters and the families of martyrs in the metropolitan areas, districts, and upazilas.

The Bangladesh Postal Service will issue a commemorative postage stamp on this occasion. Religious institutions will arrange special prayers and services for the peace and progress of the country. Special meals will be served at orphanages, old age homes, hospitals, jails, government children's homes, and similar institutions. All children's parks and museums in the country will be open to the public without entry fees and Liberation War-based films will be screened at cinemas cost-free.
