Martyred Intellectuals’ Day: Nation pays homage today
2024-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/martyred-intellectuals-day-nation-pays-homage-today-3775751

The nation today observes Martyred Intellectuals' Day, recalling the ultimate sacrifice of the leading intellectuals killed systematically by the Pakistan occupation army and their local collaborators at the fag-end of the country's Liberation War in 1971.

The day marks as one of the most tragic days in the country's history when renowned academics, doctors, engineers, journalists, and artists and other eminent personalities were dragged blind-folded out of their homes in the capital and killed in cold blood.

Sensing the imminent defeat, the Pakistani occupying army and their local collaborators abducted the luminaries and killed them to intellectually cripple the soon-to-be-born nation.

These shining individuals were the guiding light for Bangalees and instrumental in the movements against disparity and repressive measures of the Pakistani rulers, thus contributing to the Liberation War.

President Mohammed Shahabuddin will pay tributes to the martyred intellectuals by placing floral wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial at Mirpur. He will place wreaths at the memorial at 7.05am, reports BSS.

Chief Adviser Professor Muhammad Yunus will follow the President to pay homage to the martyred intellectuals. The President and the Chief Adviser will stand there in solemn silence for a while as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the illustrious sons of the soil, according to BSS report.

A smartly-turned-out contingent of the Bangladesh Armed Forces will offer a state salute.

The President and the Chief Adviser issued separate messages on the eve of the day.

Mohammed Shahabuddin in a message said, "I call upon all to play an effective role from their respective positions to build a new Bangladesh, inspired by the spirit of non-discrimination," UNB reported.

In his message, Prof Yunus said that the interim government, formed through the mass uprising, is committed to building a developed, prosperous, and well-governed Bangladesh.

He also called on everyone to unite, resist any conspiracy by anti-liberation forces, and fulfill their responsibilities from their respective positions.

People from different political and social organisations and walks of life and ages would place floral wreaths at memorials at Mirpur and Rayerbazar as well as elsewhere in the country at the daybreak.

Bangladesh Radio, Bangladesh Television and private TV channels will air special programmes highlighting the sacrifices of the intellectuals for national independence.

Moreover, special prayers and services will be held at mosques, temples, churches, pagodas, and other places of worship across the country on the Martyred Intellectuals Day.

To preserve the sanctity of the day, the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs has requested the public to refrain from using microphones or loudspeakers in the vicinity of the memorial at Mirpur.

To mark the day, different socio-cultural and political organisations have chalked out elaborate programmes, including seminars, discussions and placing wreaths at the memorials at Mirpur and Rayerbazar.

Dhaka University has also prepared programmes to pay respect to the martyred intellectuals, many of whom belonged to the university. Black flags will be hoisted at all dormitories, at the vice-chancellor's residence and buildings of the university in the morning.
