Regional Resistance: Palashdanga Jubo Shibir of Sirajganj
2024-12-13T00:00:16+06:00 | Ahmad Istiak
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/regional-resistance-palashdanga-jubo-shibir-sirajganj-3775011

During the 1971 Liberation War, dozens of regional forces emerged across Bangladesh. Just as the freedom fighters trained under the sub-sectors and the Bengal Regiment fought valiantly, these regional forces also put up tough resistance against the Pakistan army. In the month of victory, we bring you the stories of some of these heroic forces.

The remote village of Jangaliagati in Kamarkhanda upazila, Sirajganj, was the birthplace of the Palashdanga Jubo Shibir (Palashdanga Youth Camp) -- a regional force that defied all odds and persevered, significantly contributing to the liberation struggle of 1971.

Regional Resistance: Aftab Bahini of Kurigram

Initiated by five student leaders, the group eventually grew to over 600 freedom fighters strong during the course of the war.

In May and November of this year, The Daily Star spoke to 30 freedom fighters of this guerilla force during visits made to several upazilas in Sirajganj and Pabna.

For the most part, Palashdanga Jubo Shibir didn't have a fixed camp. The freedom fighters used Chalan Beel as a base, mostly residing on boats. The remote nature of Chalan Beel made it difficult for the Pakistani forces to invade the region.

A member of the group, Abdur Rahman told this newspaper that they relied on a fleet of 54 boats for transportation and attacks on Pakistani camps.

"We had two training camps in Gaihata and Kaliakoir, Ullapara, within the Chalan Beel region. We also had a secret hideout in Dharail Beel," Arshedul Islam, another freedom fighter, said.

This force engaged in over 50 battles, resulting in the deaths of over a hundred Pakistani soldiers and Razakars, according to the book Muktijuddho Kosh, Volume 8, written by historian Muntasir Mamun.

The battles carried out by Palashdanga Jubo Shibir between May and November include the raid on Tarash Police Station, Jhail Bridge operation, Ghatina Bridge operation, and Jamtoil Bridge operation in Sirajganj; Dilpashar Bridge operation and the battle of Koidanga Bridge, battle of Kashinathpur, battle of Dabbagan, battle of Santhia in Pabna; and attack on Gurdaspur Police Station in Natore.

They also frequently attacked various Razakar camps, which include those in Solonga, Bastul, Mannannagar, and Dhamaich Hat in Tarash upazila, Sirajganj.

Regional Resistance: Shibbari Youth Camp & George Bahini

The battle of Naogaon Bazar in Tarash on November 10 dealt the heaviest blow to enemy forces by the Palashdanga Jubo Shibir. This intense battle resulted in the deaths of over 100 Pakistani soldiers and Razakars, while the freedom fighters emerged victorious without any casualties.

FORMATION

Following the March 25 massacre, influential student leader Abdul Latif Mirza began mobilising local students and youths.

These young recruits then received training at Sirajganj Government College under soldiers from the Bengal Regiment, freedom fighter Sohrab Ali Sarker told this newspaper.

"On April 24, acting on a tip-off that Pakistani troops were headed to Sirajganj from Pabna by train, over 100 freedom fighters, led by Latif Mirza, launched an attack on the Pakistani forces at Ghatina Railway Bridge in Ullapara."

The Pakistani army retaliated, leading to a fierce battle that lasted for around three hours. During the clash, five Pakistani soldiers were killed.

Twenty freedom fighters also lost their lives. At one point, the freedom fighters were forced to retreat.

Another freedom fighter, Lutfar Rahman Makhan, said that after the defeat, Latif Mirza led a group of 50 freedom fighters from Sirajganj and set out for India to receive military training.

"Of them, five men failed to meet with Latif and returned to Sirajganj."

They were Sirajganj College unit Student Union vice president Sohrab Ali Sarker, pro-vp Lutfar Rahman Makhan, and student leaders Abdul Aziz Sarker, Shafiqul Islam Shafi, and Monirul Kabir.

These five student leaders who began mobilising the local force that went on to be known as the Palashdanga Jubo Shibir, Lutfar added.

TRAINING

In May, these student leaders took shelter at the house of Chandu Sheikh, a resident of Jangaliagati village in Bhadraghat union.

Abdul Aziz Sarker said, "The then Sirajganj sub-divisional officer AK Shamsuddin and sub-divisional police officer Anwarul Haque Laskar gave us 13 rifles that were in their possession to support the war effort."

Regional Resistance: Pathaan Bahini of Chandpur

Armed with these rifles, the freedom fighters being mobilised by the student leaders began training in Bhadraghat under the supervision of Lutfar Rahman Arun, a soldier from the Bengal Regiment.

Soon after, youths in dozens began joining the training sessions for nearby areas, Aziz added.

At the end of May, Latif Mirza returned from India with a group of 30 trained freedom fighters.

"Latif Mirza's arrival in Bhadraghat boosted the morale of the freedom fighters," Sohrab said.

On June 6, in the presence of freedom fighters, the force was named Palashdanga Jubo Shibir.

"To avoid detection, we opted for 'Palashdanga' instead of using the more recognisable names of Jangaliagati or Bhadraghat," Aziz told this newspaper.

ATTACK ON BHADRAGHAT

During the initial phase of the war, the freedom fighters, aside from training, launched night operations against Pakistani forces.

Freedom fighter Shafiqul Islam Shafi said, "Tipped off about our location, Pakistani troops attacked Bhadraghat in the early hours of June 17. The over a hundred freedom fighters present at the camp put up a valiant resistance."

A Pakistani soldier was killed in the ensuing battle. However, with the arrival of additional Pakistani troops, the freedom fighters were overwhelmed and forced to retreat, he added.

After that, the freedom fighters left Bhadraghat and moved to the Chalan Beel region, setting up temporary camps on boats.

From there they conducted operations over a vast area spreading from Sirajganj's Ullapara, Belkuchi, Shahjadpur, and Tarash, to Pabna's Faridpur, Sathia, Bhangura, Bogura's Sherpur and Natore's Gurudaspur.

Regional Resistance: Halim Bahini of Manikganj

NOTABLE OPS

An important operation was the raid on Tarash Police Station in the middle of July when a group of more than 100 freedom fighters attacked the station and looted 20 rifles in the armoury.

Abdur Rahman, the leader of the operation, said, "We arrived by boat around 5:00pm and launched a surprise attack on the police station. The policemen at the station complied with our orders and handed over all the rifles and ammunition in their possession."

On November 10, as freedom fighters set up camp near Naogaon Bazar for the night, they received intelligence of an imminent attack by the Pakistani army.

Led by Latif Mirza, the fighters quickly relocated to Naogaon Bazar, where they also had a camp.

When the Pak army did not find any freedom fighters at the location, they decided to check the nearby Naogaon Bazar camp.

There, the waiting freedom fighters launched an attack on the enemy forces.

The Pakistani forces, unable to withstand the assault, were forced to surrender, suffering heavy casualties of 130 soldiers and razakars.

Freedom fighter Lutfar Rahman Makhan said, "It was the largest guerrilla battle in the north. At the end of it, nine Pakistani soldiers, including a Pakistani captain, surrendered to us with a lot of arms and ammunition."

The bravery displayed by the freedom fighters in this battle was highlighted by Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra.

Translated and edited from Bangla by Subrata Roy.
