Liberation war affairs secy made OSD
2014-08-19T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/liberation-war-affairs-secy-made-osd-37765

Liberation War Affairs Secretary KH Masud Siddiqui was made officer on special duty (OSD) yesterday.

The secretary faces allegations of having obtained a freedom fighters' certificate through false documents to extend his tenure in service. He was also accused by a government probe body of purchasing subpar crests awarded to foreign friends in recognition of their contributions to the 1971 Liberation War.

The Ministry of Public Administration issued a gazette notification in this regard yesterday. According to the notice, MA Hannan, additional secretary of the environment and forests ministry, has been made acting secretary of the liberation war affairs ministry.

The public administration ministry had sent a proposal regarding Siddiqui to the Prime Minister's Office for approval and PM Sheikh Hasina approved the move on Thursday.

Making someone an OSD is regarded as a punishment posting.

Siddiqui, who was supposed to go on a year's leave preparatory to retirement (LPR) from October 30, used the freedom fighters' certificate through forged documents last year to have his tenure extended.

The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) is currently investigating the allegation.

Earlier, former joint secretary of liberation war affairs ministry Md Abul Kashem Talukder was made an OSD on the same ground.

In November 2012, the government extended the retirement age of freedom fighters from 59 years to 60.

The ACC is also looking into the same allegation against Khandakar Shawkat Hossain, expatriates' welfare and overseas employment secretary; Niaz Uddin Mia, health secretary; AKM Amir Hossain, Public Service Commission secretary; Molla Waheeduzzaman, privatisation commission chairman; and Md Abul Kashem Talukder, former joint secretary of liberation war affairs ministry (now an OSD).

The ministry has so far revoked freedom fighters' certificates of 182 public servants that were obtained through forgery, and is investigating another 5,000 people, including 300 government employees on the same charge.
