Poetry books to read on this Victory Day
2024-12-14T18:12:59+06:00 | Nur-E-Jannat Alif
https://www.thedailystar.net/life-living/news/poetry-books-read-victory-day-3776071

Many of us find solace in the quiet act of reflection, revisiting the sacrifices and triumphs that define our nation's journey and what better way to honour this spirit than through poetry? This year, to observe 16 December, we have curated a list of four diverse yet fascinating poetry books for you to immerse yourself in.

Shonali Kabin

Al-Mahmud

Nowroz Shahittyo Shombhar, 2015

To this day, Shonali Kabin by Al-Mahmud shines as a poetic gem of Bangla literature. This golden poem is a tender letter to the rural heart of Bangladesh, knitting a profoundly moving tale of tradition, love, and resiliency. Throughout the course of the book, we follow a newly-married couple bound by their kabin — a symbolic representation of their sacred marriage at its core. Their love story takes place with all the simplicity and complexity of rural life, surrounded by expansive fields and gurgling rivers.

Al-Mahmud uses the vivid backstrokes of this couple's destiny to denote the spirit of the Liberation War, referencing themes of revolt, resolution, and national identity. Apart from the titular poem, some of the other mentionable ones are: 'Daaybhag,' 'Notun Obde,' 'Jaatishwor,' etc.

Ondhokare Alor Rodon

Hridoy Mohammad Ali

Shahittodesh, 2023

Speaking of poems that leave a lasting impression, Ondhokare Alor Rodon by Hridoy Mohammad Ali is a powerful and stirring narration that introduces a sculptor whose hands shape not only art but also the turmoil of his tormented soul. Words such as war cries, death, weapons, and power, make him feel a welling sadness, and his brain signals a spike in blood flow. From the quiet nooks of rural Bangladesh to international acclaim, his creations, born out of grief and rebellion, travel the world. Driven by retribution and plagued by his ancestors' pleas for justice, the sculptor transforms into a creative and destructive force that reflects a society in unrest, ripped apart by conflict and control.

A profound meditation on the tenacity of the human spirit, the story is a nuanced waltz between good and evil, with overtones of historical grandeur, much like the Liberation War of Bangladesh.

Poetry on Liberation War

Nazmul Hoque Chowdhury

BhumiProkash, 2023

A must-read for the fans of raw commentary and compelling accounts of bravery, Nazmul Hoque Chowdhury's Poetry on Liberation War would be a haunting read (favourably or unfavourably, you decide). It is an anthology that narrates selfless, indomitable tales of the fight for emancipation, the spirit of a country risen from ashes. The poet, in striking clarity, depicts the blood-soaked plains, silent valour of martyrs, and echoes of independence continuously resonating in the modern independent country.

Poems named 'Protest against Repression', 'A Strife on State Lingo,' and 'Final Declaration' place you in the heart of the fight and take you through each victory, each sob, and every tear. More than recounting history, they enact it. This is a reminder of the price of freedom, an ode to bravery, and a memorial to the ones who sacrificed everything.

Bondi Shibir Theke (From The Concentration Camp)

Shamsur Rahman

Bivas, 2016

In Bondi Shibir Theke (From the Concentration Camp), Shamsur Rahman delves into the thought-provoking themes of suffering, resilience, and political unrest, continuing the tradition of his earlier works like Asader Shirt, Shafed Panjabi, and Swadhinata Tumi. His voice becomes a fierce embodiment of protest, realising the common man's struggles for freedom and justice. The titular poem perfectly captures the emotional and physical toll of oppression, intertwining the poet's personal journey with the broader fight for liberation amidst a turbulent authoritarian climate.

In this collection, Rahman's poetry transcends into a rallying cry for the masses, immersing the reader in the grief, defiance, and unyielding hope of those fighting for their voices to be heard.

The writer is a gender studies major and part-time writer who dreams of authoring a book someday. Find her at @literatureinsolitude on Instagram or send her your book/movie/television recommendations at [email protected] .
