We almost always try to distort history: Kader Siddique
2024-12-16T17:17:31+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Savar
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/we-almost-always-try-distort-history-kader-siddique-3777761

People in Bangladesh always try to distort history and those who remain in power want to portray themselves as great heroes of history, Krishak Sramik Janata League President Abdul Kader Siddique said today.

He came up with the remark after paying tribute to the brave martyrs at the National Memorial in Savar on the occasion of Victory Day.

He said, "We almost always try to distort history. When those in power want to portray themselves as great heroes of history. But that is not true. If we forget the past, the present will be as bad as it is, the future will be dark. I will say one thing, we must value freedom, we must value the brave soldiers of independence, we must value the martyrs, we must value the leaders of independence. Our future will not be good by denying them."

Kader Siddiqui, also the head of the Kaderia Bahini during the 1971 Liberation War, said, "Bangabandhu cannot be denied in any way for the country's independence. In this case, I would also say that half of Bangladesh would have been burnt to the ground, but we have reached the limit of barbarity by burning Bangabandhu's museum. Genghis Khan burned Egypt to destroy Egyptian civilisation."

"Similarly, burning Bangabandhu's museum was the biggest injustice. Those who are in the government today and were successful in the movement should have said so that they were not involved (with these criminal activities) and expressed their regret," he added.

Bangabir Kader Siddique further said that the Victory Day is a historical event for the entire country. "We have not become independent even in a thousand years. December 16 is the victory of Bangladesh, March 26 is Independence Day. Independence is born only once as the death comes after birth, just like independence. But victory comes occasionally, something great is achieved through it. In July and August 2024, a truly historic victory of a nation came."

"This country, the country of the people, that country was not run according to the needs of the people. That is why, due to the protests of the people, the anti-discrimination movement has succeeded. I congratulate on that success, give thank, and sincerely wish all the best," he said.

About politics, he also said, "Bangladesh's independence came through the election verdict was denied. The people of Bangladesh created Bangladesh to vote. That has been repeatedly violated, disrupted, and the success of '24 anti-discrimination movement is an expression of the dissatisfaction of this country's people."

He added, "If the elections are not held soon, if they do not go to the elections, people will be angry. They will be angry even more than they were with Sheikh Hasina."
