Dec 17: Freedom came a day later in Khulna
2024-12-17T00:00:00+06:00 | Dipankar Roy
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/dec-17-freedom-came-day-later-khulna-3778101

While Bangladesh officially emerged as an independent nation on December 16, 1971, the people of Khulna tasted freedom on December 17, when freedom fighters finally took control of the city after fierce battles.

Despite the Pakistani forces' surrender in Dhaka, Khulna remained under siege, with Pakistani troops and their collaborators, including Razakar, Al-Badr, and Al-Shams, holding a firm grip on the city.

"Jamaat-e-Islami leader AKM Yusuf, who led the Peace Committee in Khulna, established the Razakar force at an Ansar camp on Khan Jahan Ali Road in the city," said Alamgir Kabir, a freedom fighter. This gave the occupying forces a stranglehold on Khulna, leading to mass killings, destruction, and relentless repression.

In response, the Mukti Bahini launched guerrilla attacks to weaken enemy forces and disrupt their supply chains. Between December 11 and 16, freedom fighters captured several camps of the Pakistani army and their collaborators, including those in Gallamari, Badamtala, and Chuknagar. However, major camps in Khulna city, such as those in Shiromoni, Khulna Shipyard, and PMG Colony, remained under enemy control.

On December 17, freedom fighters entered Khulna city through multiple routes, including Gallamari, Rupsha Ghat, and Crescent Jute Mill, targeting remaining strongholds.

"This day evokes mixed emotions for the people of Khulna," said SM Babar Ali, 75, a freedom fighter and former lawmaker. "There was joy over Bangladesh's independence but despair knowing Khulna was still not free."

Freedom fighters, led by Major Joynul Abedin, launched attacks in Gallamari on the night of December 16 and early December 17, dispersing enemy forces.

"Two significant battles in Shiromoni and Khulna Shipyard ensured the city's liberation," added Babar Ali.

Alamgir Kabir recalled the intense battle in Shiromoni, where Pakistani forces had deployed several regiments supported by six tanks.

"Local support was crucial in this tank battle, which has since become a case study at military academies like Dehradun and Sandhurst," said Kabir. Eventually, 200 Pakistani soldiers surrendered with their weapons, while collaborators fled.

In another battle at Khulna Shipyard, freedom fighters overcame an ambush by the Pakistani forces. One fighter was martyred, and 16 others were injured.

After seizing control of Khulna, the freedom fighters hoisted the flag of independent Bangladesh at Khulna Circuit House and Shaheed Hadis Park. Major (retd) Joynul Abedin and Gazi Rahmatulla Dadu raised the flag at the Circuit House at around 10:30am.

Later, Sector-9 commander MA Jalil handed over several hundred prisoners of war, including Pakistani commander Brig Hayat Ali Khan, to General Dalbir Singh of the Indian forces in Khalishpur.

Khulna's liberation stands as a testament to the resilience and bravery of the freedom fighters and the local people who refused to surrender their dream of independence.
