Humiliation of a freedom fighter is unacceptable
2024-12-24T22:02:57+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/editorial/news/humiliation-freedom-fighter-unacceptable-3783901

We condemn the assault and humiliation of Freedom Fighter Abdul Hai Kanu in Chauddagram, Cumilla. On December 22, he was reportedly beaten and forced to wear a garland of shoes around his neck by a group of Jamaat activists and supporters—two of whom were later expelled from the party. The group also ordered him to leave the district by nightfall. Following the incident, a video surfaced on Facebook showing two individuals dragging Abdul Hai while he was wearing the garland. We must say, such indignity for a freedom fighter is an affront to not just the person himself but also all freedom fighters and the very ideals of our Liberation War. This heinous act has rightly sparked outrage and demands for justice.

Fifty-three years after our liberation, it is unimaginable that our freedom fighters—whose sacrifices brought us to where we are today—could still be subjected to such treatment. Following the incident, Abdul Hai fell ill and is now receiving treatment at a private hospital in Feni. He expressed his frustration asking, "For whom did I fight to achieve the country's independence? Certainly not to wear a garland of shoes like this."

It is encouraging to see various socio-political groups, including BNP, protest the incident. The chief adviser's office has also condemned it, directing the police and local administration to launch an investigation. So far,&nbsp;police have arrested five individuals in this connection.&nbsp;This sends a positive signal that such incidents will not be tolerated.

It is encouraging to see various socio-political groups, including BNP, protest the incident. The chief adviser's office has also condemned it, directing the police and local administration to launch an investigation. So far,&nbsp;police have arrested five individuals in this connection.&nbsp;This sends a positive signal that such incidents will not be tolerated.

The Liberation War of 1971 is the most significant event in our history. It was a people's war, and those who fought in it should be the most honoured individuals in our country. Regrettably, we have fallen short in extending the respect they deserve, as evidenced by the public humiliation of Abdul Hai. Over the decades, our nation has often failed to meet the expectations of the Liberation War, and we must hold our political leaders accountable for not fulfilling people's dreams and aspirations. However, this does not justify tarnishing the spirit of the Liberation War in any way—certainly not by assaulting a freedom fighter.

It is encouraging to see various socio-political groups, including BNP , protest the incident. The chief adviser's office has also condemned it, directing the police and local administration to launch an investigation. So far, police have arrested five individuals in this connection. This sends a positive signal that such incidents will not be tolerated in an independent country. Going forward, we must be more vigilant and prevent any repeat of such humiliation for freedom fighters or other symbols of our independence struggle.
