Kushtia erupts into protest
2025-02-07T00:24:19+06:00 | Ahmad Istiak
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/kushtia-erupts-protest-3818111

This year marks the 73rd anniversary of the 1952 Language Movement. Drawing on research based on various published books, this 21-part series tells the story of the historic struggle for our mother tongue.

Public sentiment in Kushtia began to shift in favour of the Language Movement towards the end of 1951.

Local political leaders, including Advocate Abdul Haque, Syed Altaf Ali, and Dr Abul Kashem, alongside student leaders like Shahida Khatun, played a crucial role in mobilising public opinion.

Tamaddun Majlish, a prominent student organisation, also played a pivotal role, under the leadership of Abdus Sattar, a lecturer at Kushtia College and a former Dhaka University student, as the president of the Kushtia district unit.

The declaration of Urdu as the sole state language by then Pakistan Prime Minister Khwaja Nazimuddin on January 27, 1952, sparked widespread protests in Kushtia, just like it did across the country.

On February 17, an important meeting, attended by members of the Tamaddun Majlish, political leaders, social and cultural figures, and student leaders, led to the formation of the All-Party State Language Action Committee in Kushtia.

According to M Abdul Alim's "Bhasha Andolon Kosh Part 1," this committee spearheaded the movement, declaring February 21 as a day of protest.

Leaflets demanding Bangla as the state language adorned the walls of Kushtia, while the sound of tin cans being blown echoed through the streets, amplifying the message of resistance.

On February 21, Kushtia observed a complete shutdown (hartal). Businesses remained closed, and educational institutions were occupied by protesting students, Ahmed Rafiq writes in his book "Bhasha Andolon: Teknaf to Tetulia".

A massive procession, comprising students and the general public, marched through the town, demanding the recognition of Bangla.

As the news of the tragic events in Dhaka, where police opened fire on peaceful student protests, reached Kushtia, the town descended into a state of mourning and anger.

On February 22, all educational institutions, shops, and offices remained closed. Students from Kushtia College, Kushtia English Girls' High School, and Kushtia United High School took to the streets.

The following day, Kushtia enforced another complete shutdown. Later that day, a massive public meeting, attended by an estimated 25,000 people, was held at the Kushtia High School grounds, Ahmed Rafiq writes in his book.

The movement went on to extend beyond the confines of Kushtia town, reaching the surrounding areas of Kumarkhali, Khoksa, and Poradah. Protests, rallies, and processions were organised, with all educational institutions remaining closed.

On March 5, students at Poradah Railway Station observed a full-day strike, culminating in a protest meeting attended by over 5,000 people.

Translated and edited by Subrata Roy.
