Mymensingh resists Urdu as state language
2025-02-10T00:18:15+06:00 | Ahmad Istiak
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/mymensingh-resists-urdu-state-language-3820301

This year marks the 73rd anniversary of the 1952 Language Movement. Drawing on research based on various published books, this 21-part series tells the story of the historic struggle for our mother tongue.

The students and people of Mymensingh observed spontaneous general strikes, processions and rallies in 1948 and 1952, resisting the Pakistan government's bid to declare Urdu as the state language by omitting Bangla.

Despite the strong influence of the Muslim League, a student rally presided over by Rafiquddin Bhuiyan was held at Bipin Park in Mymensingh city in favour of Bangla as a state language in December 1947.

In February 1948, when the proposal for Bangla as a state language was opposed by the Muslim League in the Constituent Assembly, students and people launched protests in Mymensingh, just like the demonstrations in Dhaka and other parts of the country.

According to the book Bhasha Andolon Teknaf Theke Tetulia by Ahmed Rafiq, a campaign was held in Mymensingh ahead of a general strike slated for March 11. Funds were raised from public donations to meet the expenses of the movement.

On March 11, an all-out strike was observed in Mymensingh, with students marching around the city in procession and chanting the slogan "Rashtrobhasha Bangla Chai (We want Bangla as a state language)". Student leaders later spoke at a rally organised by the local Renaissance Society at Bipin Park.

After Muhammad Ali Jinnah spoke in favour of Urdu as the sole state language of Pakistan in March, the Language Movement gained pace in Mymensingh like Dhaka and other parts of the country.

Police baton-charged protesters during a student rally at Bipin Park on March 25.

On January 27, 1952, when the government declared Urdu as the state language of Pakistan, the students and public of Mymensingh took to the streets.

According to the book Bhasha Andolon Kosh Part 1 by M Abdul Alim, a Sarbodolyio Rashtrobhasha Sangram Parishad (All-Party Language Struggle Council) was formed with Ananda Mohan College teacher Syed Badruddin Hossain as president. Rafiquddin Bhuiyan became the general secretary of the Parishad.

A massive campaign was carried out ahead of February 21, the main day of the movement, as part of centrally announced programmes from Dhaka. Besides pasting posters on walls, the protesters in Mymensingh distributed leaflets.

On February 21, a general strike was observed, with a shutdown of businesses and a boycott of classes. Students, led by Syed Badruddin, brought out a procession from Ananda Mohan College and joined a rally at Bipin Park in violation of Section 144. The speakers demanded that Bangla be given the status of a state language immediately.

As soon as the news of deadly police firing on student protesters in Dhaka reached Mymensingh, the entire city erupted in protests. People gathered in front of Rafiquddin Bhuiyan's residence to know the next course of the movement. On February 22, people from all walks of life took to the streets.

A condolence meeting chaired by Rafiquddin was held on the Town Hall premises, demanding Bangla as a state language, a fair investigation into the killings of protesters in Dhaka and the punishment of the perpetrators. A huge procession of students led by Ananda Mohan College's Tahmida Saida joined the rally.

During a general strike at the college on February 23, a decision was taken to form Rashtrobhasha Sangram Committees in every subdivision of greater Mymensingh.

According to the book Bhasha Andolon Teknaf Theke Tetulia, on February 24, the city was entirely covered with posters and black flags. Protesters wore black badges and carried black flags during processions.

On the other hand, the Muslim League organised a grand rally at the Town Hall to show that the situation in the city was normal. The angry crowd of protesters later chased them away.

The largest rally and strongest general strike in the history of the Language Movement in Mymensingh was observed on February 26. About 30,000 people joined the rally at Bipin Park that afternoon.
