Creative Resistance in Kurigram
2025-02-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Ahmad Istiak
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/creative-resistance-kurigram-3824296

The Language Movement inspired creative expressions of resistance in Kurigram. Travelling singing groups wove humorous dialogues demanding Bangla as the state language into their songs. Baul singers infused their melodies with the powerful slogans of the movement. Theatre troupes, in turn, poignantly depicted the sacrifices made by the martyrs on stage.

1948 MOVEMENT

According to Ahmed Rafiq's "Language Movement from Teknaf to Tentulia," despite limited communication with the rest of the country, Kurigram, one of the northernmost districts, enforced a complete strike on March 11, in line with Dhaka's call for the nationwide programme.

Students from Kurigram High School, Kurigram Girls' High School, and Kurigram Junior High School organised protests and marches; their voices united in the demand for "We want Bangla as the state language!"

According to the book "Bhasha Andolon e Kurigram" by Chhomir Aminul, student leaders like Aman Ullah, Ali Afsar, Abul Fazal, Afzal Hossain, and Mostafa Bin Khandaker emerged as prominent figures in the 1948 movement.

In April, the All-Party State Language Action Committee was formally formed in Kurigram, with Kazi Emdadul Haque serving as the convener and Mia Abdul Hafiz as the member secretary. Syed Shamsul Haque (who later became a renowned writer), Riaz Uddin Bhola, Mia Hafiz Bhengra, Kazem Moktar, and Abdur Rahman Moktar were among the prominent members of the council.

The arrival of prominent political leader Maulana Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani and eminent journalist and politician Tofazzal Hossain Manik Miah in the third week of May further fuelled the movement in Kurigram.

RENEWED PROTEST

The events of 1952 ignited a renewed wave of protest.

After the declaration of Urdu as the sole state language by then prime minister Khwaja Nazimuddin on January 27, preparations for the February 21 nationwide strike were intensified. Posters and leaflets were distributed across the district to mobilise public support.

On February 21, a complete strike (hartal) was observed in Kurigram.

A massive student procession, led by students from Kurigram High School, marched through the town, their voices echoing with slogans "We want Bangla as the state language!"

Students from Kurigram Junior High School and Kurigram Girls' School joined the procession, which culminated in a rally at Kurigram High School.

The news of the tragic events in Dhaka, where police opened fire on peaceful student protests, reached Kurigram on the afternoon of February 23.

An emergency meeting was held, where it was decided to observe a complete strike in protest.

On February 24, students from various schools and colleges, wearing black badges as a symbol of mourning, took to the streets, M Abdul Alim writes in his book "Bhasha Andolon Kosh Part 1".

The procession faced police resistance, with the police resorting to baton charges.

However, the students remained undeterred, continuing their march and staging a protest rally at the Kurigram Public Library grounds.

Translated and edited by Subrata Roy.
