Bangladeshi artistes to honour Language Movement at Unesco event in Paris
2025-02-19T11:16:11+06:00 | Arts & Entertainment Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/entertainment/music/news/bangladeshi-artistes-honour-language-movement-unesco-event-paris-3828171

A group of musicians from Bangladesh will take the stage at the Unesco headquarters in Paris as part of the 25th-anniversary celebrations of International Mother Language Day. According to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, performances by Bangladeshi artistes will be a key highlight of the event.

Ekushey February was officially acknowledged as International Mother Language Day by Unesco in 1999, and it has been observed in United Nations member states since February 21, 2000. This year marks the silver jubilee of this significant recognition.

To commemorate the occasion, the series of events and performances will take place at Unesco headquarters in Paris on February 20 and 21. Professor Muhammad Yunus, chief adviser of the interim government, has been invited as the guest of honour for the inauguration and will address the event virtually.

Additionally, Mostofa Sarwar Farooki, adviser to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, will participate in a ministerial-level discussion alongside representatives from member states.

Islam Uddin Palakar, "Kotha Ko" famed rapper Shezan, Shunno's Imrul Karim Emil and the all-female ethnic community band F Minor, Parsha Mahjabeen, Tuntun Baul, Jalal, Mithun Chakra, and Jahid Nirob departed from Dhaka yesterday to participate in the silver jubilee celebrations of International Mother Language Day in Paris.

Zohad Reza Chowdhury reveals wife is cancer-free

In this event, Islam Uddin Palakar will perform a fusion of Shezan's song "Kotha Ko", which set the stage for July, and a song from the Language Movement of 1952. Meanwhile, Parsha Mahzabin, accompanied by Tuntun Baul, will perform the Lalon Geeti classic "Jaat Gelo".

Emil is scheduled to perform "Shono Mohajon". F Minor's vocalists Pinky Chiran and Parsha Mahjabeen will sing "Amar Bhaier Rokte Rangano" in Noagri, Garo, Chakma, and Bangla. Additionally, Islam Uddin will present the renowned pala "Pashan Mon Re".

The event has been directed by filmmaker Tanim Noor, with musical direction by Jahid Nirob. A documentary featuring writer-researcher Badruddin Umar and language movement veteran Tahmina Saleh will also be screened, directed by Tanim Noor.

The event is supported by the Embassy of Bangladesh in Paris, France.
