Language movement awakens sense of nationalism, unity: Tarique
2025-02-21T00:53:53+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/language-movement-awakens-sense-nationalism-unity-tarique-3829701

BNP acting chairman Tarique Rahman has described February 21 as an unforgettable chapter of the nation's history and said the great language movement always awakens the sense of nationalism and unity.

"The language movement awakens our sense of nationalism and unity. The great language movement is the first step towards achieving the nation's freedom movement," he said in a Facebook post last afternoon marking the International Mother Language Day.

Tarique said, "On the blood-stained February 21, Dhaka University students shed their fresh blood to protect our mother tongue. Many including Salam, Barkat, Rafiq, and Jabbar sacrificed lives on that day."

He said February 21 is now observed as the International Mother Language Day around the globe.

Tarique added, "Language movement in 1952 intensified the path towards the country's all democratic and self-determination struggles, ultimately leading to our national independence through a bloody war. The people were freed from shackles and regained a sovereign land."

"Despite the country's independence, authoritarian forces continue to conspire to impose their dominance over our language and culture, with an aim to serve a particular group, so that we cannot stand tall in the global community," he said.

However, the people of this country have consistently resisted both the domestic and foreign conspiracies with unprecedented courage, he added.

"In order to prevent the nation from being suppressed, we must work together to strengthen and sustain justice, human equality, and true democracy," he said, adding, "The democratic forces, which believe in independence and sovereignty, must remain vigilant to ensure that none can ever imprison the democracy in harsh shackles."

"The undying spirit of February 21 will inspire us in this endeavour," he said.

Now, with the recognition of February 21 as International Mother Language Day, the movement has been established globally as symbol of preserving the dignity of the mother tongue, Tarique said, wishing success of various programmes being taken by different social, cultural, and political organisations marking the day.

Tarique prayed for the eternal peace of the departed souls of the 1952 language martyrs and extended his condolences to the members of their bereaved families.
