Upholding the legacy of Ekushey
2025-02-21T10:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/editorial/news/upholding-the-legacy-ekushey-3829381

As we observe the 73rd anniversary of the historic Ekushey February, we humbly recall the sacrifices of the martyrs and all those who fought to secure Bangla in its rightful place. The Language Movement of 1952 catalysed the assertion of our national identity in what was then Pakistan and became a forerunner to subsequent movements—the emergence of self-rule consciousness in the 1954 provincial election, the student movement of 1962, and the 1969 uprising—all of which ultimately culminated in our glorious Liberation War of 1971. The supreme sacrifice of the Language Movement's martyrs became a symbol of inspiration for sustaining our self-consciousness and dignity as a nation.

However, despite commemorating Ekushey February for more than 70 years, the unfortunate reality remains that we have yet to fully examine or articulate its significance as a nation. The use of Bangla in all aspects of life is still not firmly established. Translation works from other languages into Bangla often remains subpar. Original writing in Bangla is largely confined to literature, while scientific and other scholarly works are frequently written in English instead of Bangla. Despite historical research clearly demonstrating the importance of the mother tongue in ensuring national cohesion, Bangla is not being properly used in all aspects of life. In fact, one could argue that Bangla, as the official language of Bangladesh, has suffered neglect at all levels. Thus, it is high time we, as a nation, reflected deeply on the use of Bangla and restore it to its rightful place.

Ekushey shouldn't be consigned to routines and rituals

Although the High Court Division issued a ruling on February 17, 2014 mandating the use of Bangla at all levels, offices, and forums in the country—and despite the existence of the Bangla Language Implementation Act, 1987—Bangla continues to face serious neglect. Admittedly, this is not a matter that can be resolved solely by a judicial decree or an act of parliament. It must be internalised by all of us and ingrained in our collective psyche.

Let us reiterate in the strongest terms that this should not come at the expense of learning other languages. English, in particular, remains essential due to its international significance. However, our great forefathers, who were experts in Bangla, were also highly proficient in English. So why can't we follow in their footsteps?

The power of the mother tongue

Additionally, while Bangla remains the official language, Indigenous languages continue to be spoken in our country—albeit barely. There is hardly any initiative to preserve these languages, many of which are on the verge of being lost forever. Let's not forget that Ekushey was such a monumental event that it has been immortalised through global recognition as International Mother Language Day, of which today is the silver jubilee. In its true spirit, we must ensure that Bangla and all other mother tongues spoken across this country receive the respect they deserve.
