Nation honours language heroes
2025-02-21T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nation-honours-language-heroes-3829861

President Mohammed Shahabuddin and Chief Adviser Professor Muhammad Yunus have paid rich tributes to the martyrs of the Language Movement, marking the Amar Ekushey and International Mother Language Day.

One-minute past midnight, the president laid a wreath. Prof Yunus paid his tributes around 12:10am after the president left the Shaheed Minar premises.

Dhaka University Vice-Chancellor Professor Niaz Ahmed Khan received them upon arrival.

After paying tributes, they stood in solemn silence for a while as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the language heroes.

Chief Justice Syed Refaat Ahmed with other judges paid their tributes and then the advisers to the interim government, foreign diplomats, invited guests and high-ranking military and civil officials, Dhaka University teachers also paid their tributes at the alter.

Afterwards, the area was opened to public.

People from all walks of life walked barefoot, with flowers in hands and humming "Amar Bhaiyer Rokte Rangano Ekushey February" to recall the supreme sacrifice of the language heroes on this day in 1952.

Meanwhile, since around 11:30pm to midnight yesterday, some 40-50 people with black flags gathered near the Shib Mandir intersection, demanding that the president is not allowed to pay tributes at the Shaheed Minar.

On this day in 1952, students and people in Dhaka took to the streets in protest against the then Pakistani government's denial of Bangla as the national language and imposition of Urdu as the only official language of Pakistan.

Salam, Barkat, Rafiq, Jabbar and a few other brave sons of the soil were killed in police firings on this day when students came out in a procession from the Dhaka University campus breaching section 144 to press home their demand for the recognition of Bangla as a state language of then Pakistan.

The supreme sacrifices inspired the nation to fight for its rights and ultimately to clinch independence.

The day is a public holiday. On the day, the national flag will be remained at half-mast in all educational institutions, government, semi-government and autonomous offices and private buildings across the country.

National dailies published special supplements marking the day and TV channels will air special programmes on the occasion.
