Voices of 1971 collaborators getting louder
2025-03-26T00:00:35+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/voices-1971-collaborators-getting-louder-3857151

BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir yesterday said that those who collaborated in the mass killings during the Liberation War are now speaking louder.

"Some people, some parties, some groups are trying to make it seem as if 1971 never happened. The Liberation War, the sacrifice of millions, the nine-month-long struggle, and the countless people who left their homes to seek shelter in India, young people couldn't even stay outside -- it's as if we are forgetting all of this. It is trying to erase these from memory. Those who collaborated in the massacre are now speaking louder than ever," said Fakhrul.

He made the comments while presiding over a discussion marking the 55th Independence Day at the capital's Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh, auditorium.

"I don't want to name anyone or create bitterness. History is history. No one can distort it.

"We can clearly understand the intentions of those who go on an election campaign with a fleet of 100 cars."

On Monday, Sarjis Alam, chief organiser (north) of the National Citizen Party, visited his hometown in Panchagarh. His journey began with a flight from Dhaka to Saidpur and then he reached Panchagarh, which is around 100km from Saidpur in a motorcade of over 100 vehicles.

Reform proposals: BNP warns of undermining elected govt

Fakhrul further said, "We must revive our old memories. Many in the younger generation today are unaware of important historical events."

"How audacious they are to even question [president] Ziaur Rahman. Shame on them. Those who don't know their own history cannot contribute to the welfare of the nation. One must know history."

Fakhrul said the BNP is with the people and will work in future as it did in the past. "The BNP will definitely be victorious, InshaAllah."

Addressing the leaders and activists, he said that the future of Bangladesh depends on them.

Don’t try to rehabilitate allies of fallen regime: Tarique

"The future of democratic Bangladesh depends on you. The future of anti-discrimination Bangladesh relies upon you."

The BNP leader said that the interim government has brought forward numerous reforms. "They have introduced many topics that our people do not understand ...

"That is why, from our party, we have responded to each of their questions related to reform proposals. We have provided complete answers to every single one. We have clearly stated which ones we agree with and which ones we do not."

Fakhrul said that there is no alternative to elections because through the polls they must move towards democracy. That is the gateway to democracy.

"But today a new conspiracy has started so that this process can be made longer or delayed... ."

Fakhrul said that several so-called leaders have emerged on social media.

"I don't know where they want to take Bangladesh. Their language, words, sentences, and statements want to take Bangladesh towards anarchy. They don't want to move it towards democracy. So, we must be careful."

The BNP leader said that now a crisis has arisen again in the country.

"... Attempts continue to make our patriotic army controversial, which we cannot accept at all. We can never allow those who protect our country, those who stand by us in the time of crisis, to be controversial."
