Don’t equate July uprising with Liberation War
2022-08-19T22:53:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/dont-equate-july-uprising-liberation-war-3870071

Any move to equate the July 2024 uprising with the 1971 Liberation War in the constitution undermines the significance of the latter and is therefore unacceptable, Bangladesh Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (JASAD) said yesterday.

The party made the statement during a meeting with the National Consensus Commission (NCC) at the LD Hall of the National Parliament. A JASAD delegation, led by General Secretary Nazmul Haque Prodhan, attended the meeting.

Mushtaq Hossain, a member of JASAD's standing committee, presented the party's proposals. He said while the 2024 uprising was important, it should not be compared with the Liberation War.

He also referred to the 1990 mass movement and said both events should be recognised in the constitution.

The party opposed any move to remove the Declaration of Independence and the March 7 speech from the constitution.

JASAD also disagreed with several proposed constitutional changes, including keeping "Bismillah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim" and the state religion at the start of the constitution. The party also rejected the idea of lowering the minimum age to contest elections from 25 to 21.

However, the party supported proposals for wider reforms. These include a bicameral legislature, increased representation of women in Parliament, and separating the posts of Prime Minister, Leader of the House, and Party Chief. The party also backed a more balanced distribution of power between the President and the Prime Minister.

JASAD called for abolishing the Rapid Action Battalion and suggested dividing the country into provinces.

At the start of the meeting, NCC Vice Chairman Prof Ali Riaz said the reform process was driven by public demand, though initiated by the interim government. He said the commission plans to finish the first round of talks with political parties by mid-May.

In the afternoon, the commission also met with the Zaker Party. A 10-member delegation, led by Secretary General Shamim Haider, presented their views.

The NCC began formal consultations on March 20. So far, it has met with seven parties.
