Accomplices of 1971 war crimes must apologise
2025-05-12T00:06:57+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/accomplices-1971-war-crimes-must-apologise-3892221

Information and Broadcasting Adviser Md Mahfuj Alam yesterday said that the issue of 1971 must be resolved, and the accomplices of war crimes must apologise.

"The Pakistani ideology will have to be ditched for participation in politics in Bangladesh," he said in Facebook.

He wrote the post titled "Two Words", whose first point was: "Pakistan has committed genocide in this country. (Even if Pakistan officially apologises, even if the country agrees to apologise again, accomplices of war crimes are yet to apologise). Making a narrative in favour of genocide for any excuse must be stopped. Sabotage of the July force, by infiltrating it, must be stopped. [You] have to come in with a clean heart."

In his second point, he wrote, "The pro-Mujib leftist forces will have no mercy. They are the brains behind the League's enforced disappearances and murders and massacres in the anti-Modi movement and at Shapla. They belong to the 36 Division."

The adviser also said, "They are still in their position, untouched despite their repulsive brokering during July. Till today, the pro-Mujib leftists are culturally and intellectually betraying July. They continue to plot against the forces of July staying in the country. All these B-teams of the League will soon be defeated. There is no use in relying on anyone else."

Earlier, in another post, he said, "The decision has been made to ban the activities of the Awami League. A provision has been added to the legal process to ban the party. The July Proclamation will be issued within the next 30 working days."

The government has decided to ban all activities of the Awami League until the trial of its leaders and activists is over at the International Crimes Tribunal.

This decision was taken in a special meeting of the advisory council Saturday night with Chief Adviser Professor Muhammad Yunus in the chair.
