Liberation War founding pillar of the state
2025-05-20T00:41:32+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/liberation-war-founding-pillar-state-3898316

Asserting that the Liberation War is one of the founding pillars of the state, National Citizen Party Convener Nahid Islam yesterday said his party does not subscribe to religious extremism or secularist ideologies.

"NCP's journey is based on the ideals of equality, justice, and human dignity that arose from the Liberation War and the aspiration for a discrimination-free and democratic state system born from the 2024 mass uprising."

He also said the party considers the continuation of the struggle by Bangalees against colonialism and elitism as its political and historical basis as well.

In a Facebook post, titled "NCP's perspectives on several issues", Nahid outlined the party's positions on various matters, stating that the NCP respects citizens' religious beliefs and spiritual sentiments.

"The religion of the majority is Islam—its ethics and humanism, as well as the language, culture, and lifestyle of Bangalee Muslims, are valued by the NCP. NCP will ensure the protection of the religious, cultural, and civic rights of minority religious and ethnic communities. NCP believes the state should preserve the religious and cultural integrity of every community."

According to the post, the NCP stands firmly against "Islamophobia and communalism and does not support religious extremism or fanaticism.

"NCP does not subscribe to either secularist or theocratic ideologies; rather, its goal is to build an inclusive democratic state through the practice of religious coexistence, harmony, and mutual responsibility and empathy."

On national identity, the statement said, "NCP embraces a civilisational national identity instead of one based on nation, religion, or tribe. NCP will develop a national culture by embracing the civilisational identity of the Bengal delta, a confluence of many languages and cultures."

Women's empowerment was listed as a core priority in Nahid's post.

He noted, "NCP will take concrete steps to ensure women's education, health, safety, leadership, and employment.

"Under family law, NCP will work to realise women's rightful share of property."

Regarding foreign policy, the NCP has taken a strong stance against Indian regional dominance.

"Indian hegemonism and Hindutva in South Asia pose a cultural and geopolitical threat to Bangladesh. NCP will adopt a firm political stance against these hegemonic tendencies. NCP believes Bangladesh should expand strategic relations with other states based on justice, dignity, civilisation, and national interest," the NCP convener wrote.

He also mentioned that the NCP envisions the creation of a new economic zone in the Bay of Bengal region, centred around Bangladesh.

"NCP aims to build an inequality-free, justice-based, corruption-free socio-economic system that resembles a welfare state. Education, public health, agriculture, climate, urban management, labour rights, and employment will be the key policy areas for NCP.

Nahid also reflected on the party's stance against authoritarian rule.

"NCP believes that to build a truly democratic state system, restructuring of the state, institutional reform, and the drafting of a new constitution are necessary. Replacing the fascist system with a new political arrangement is NCP's foremost political duty."
