Pakistan navy chief visits Bangladesh for the first time since 1971
2025-11-10T00:30:45+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/diplomacy/news/pakistan-navy-chief-visits-bangladesh-first-time-1971-4031226

On the first day of his three-day official visit to Bangladesh, Pakistan Navy Chief Admiral Naveed Ashraf paid a courtesy call on General Waker-uz-Zaman at Army Headquarters yesterday.

This marks the first visit made by a Pakistan Navy chief to Bangladesh since the Liberation War in 1971.

During the meeting, they discussed ways to strengthen defence ties and enhance the military capabilities of both forces and exchanged views on expanding cooperation through bilateral training, seminars, and exchange visits.

Admiral Ashraf also praised the professionalism of Bangladeshi participants in the joint naval exercise AMAN, held in Karachi and the North Arabian Sea in February this year, according to an Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR) press release and a Bangladesh Army social media post.

The Pakistan Navy Chief also paid a courtesy call on Bangladesh Navy Chief Admiral M Nazmul Hassan at the Naval Headquarters in Banani.

Upon arrival, he was received by the Bangladesh Navy Chief and presented with a guard of honour by a naval contingent. He inspected the guard and took the salute.

The two chiefs exchanged greetings and discussed matters related to professional and training cooperation. Senior officials from both sides, including the Pakistan High Commissioner, Defence Attaché, and Principal Staff Officers from the Bangladesh Navy Headquarters, were present.

Earlier in the day, Admiral Ashraf paid homage to the members of the armed forces who made the supreme sacrifice during the Liberation War of 1971 by placing a wreath at Shikha Anirban in Dhaka Cantonment.

During his stay, Admiral Ashraf is scheduled to meet the Chief of Air Staff, the Principal Staff Officer of the Armed Forces Division, the Commandant of the National Defence College, and naval administrative authorities in Chattogram.

Meanwhile, Pakistan Navy ship PNS SAIF arrived in Chattogram on Saturday on a four-day goodwill visit. The ship's commanding officer, officers, and crew members will visit the Bangladesh Naval Academy, naval bases, and several places of interest in the port city.

Members of the Bangladesh Navy will also visit PNS SAIF, creating opportunities for professional exchange and experience sharing between the two navies.

Admiral Naveed Ashraf and PNS SAIF are scheduled to leave Bangladesh on November 12, 2025.
