Grave of 1971 war hero desecrated with fire on Victory Day
2025-12-16T15:27:03+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Shariatpur
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/grave-1971-war-hero-desecrated-fire-victory-day-4059836

A fire was set to the grave of freedom fighter Abul Mannan Khan at Niyamatpur village in Shariatpur Sadar upazila in the early hours of Victory Day , family members alleged.

Confirming the incident to The Daily Star, Shariatpur Sadar Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) Elora Yasmin said she was at the parade programme marking the Victory Day when Abul Mannan's daughter informed her over phone that someone had set fire to her father's grave late at night.

The Upazila Land Officer was immediately sent to the site and found evidence of fire and ashes on the grave, though the grave remained intact without damage, she said.

"Freedom fighters attending the Victory Day event strongly condemned the act. Setting fire to a freedom fighter's grave is disgraceful, and the matter will be thoroughly investigated," the UNO said.

According to family and local sources, Abul Mannan Khan participated in the 1971 Liberation War and fought against Pakistani forces. He passed away on January 8, 2010, and was buried beside his family home. Around midnight today, miscreants set fire to his grave by placing firewood on it.

This morning, his wife, Mahfuza Begum, found ashes and smoke rising from the grave. Hearing her cries, family members rushed to the site and informed local freedom fighters and administration officials.

Afroza Akter, daughter of Abul Mannan Khan, said, "My father fought with arms to liberate the country, and tonight, on Victory Day, fire has been set on his grave. I demand exemplary punishment for those who have caused pain to my late father's soul."

Aminul Islam Jitu, former chief coordinator of the Shariatpur district branch of Students Against Discrimination (SAD) said, "Setting fire on a freedom fighter's grave on Victory Day insults the 1971 Liberation War." He strongly condemned the act and demanded swift identification and punishment of the perpetrators.

Abdul Aziz Sikder, convener of the Shariatpur Sadar Upazila Freedom Fighters' Command Council, said the incident was extremely concerning and alarming. The matter has been discussed with local freedom fighters and reported to the district police superintendent and district administration.
