State failed to fulfill 1971 dreams: Rizwana Hasan
2025-12-16T12:26:58+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Savar
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/state-failed-fulfill-1971-dreams-rizwana-hasan-4059756

Syeda Rizwana Hasan, adviser to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, and the Ministry of Water Resources and Information and Broadcasting, Syeda said the state failed to fulfill the dream of 1971.

"It is true that when a mass uprising has to take place even after 54 years, it means that the dream, belief, and expectations we had in 1971 could not be fulfilled by the state," she told reporters at the National Memorial in Savar this morning.

She expressed hope that February's election would strengthen democracy and government accountability. "Through this election, we will begin a strong journey towards democracy, where it will not only be an election but also a referendum," she said.

"To defeat opponents through assassination attempts rather than logic and argument is condemnable and cowardly. There is no heroism in it. If you have strength, face the people. How to face the people in a democratic state is clear to everyone. There is no scope for accepting this culture in the new Bangladesh," she added.

"The story of failure or success of a one-and-a-half-year government needs to be assessed differently because when we took responsibility for running the state, it was completely collapsed. Our task was to repair that collapse and put the state back on a journey," she claimed.

Condemning the recent attacks, she added, they revealed the need to strengthen security. "The opponents are more organised and are carrying out the attacks from behind. We need to take more measures against such attacks. We are doing so and strengthening security."

"Our effort is to ensure a fair election where people can vote spontaneously and peacefully. A force is working in society to disrupt this process. We must resist that force while also building resistance," the adviser emphasised.

She added that attempts were being made to intimidate the public.

"An effort is being made to frighten the people. The government's responsibility is to reassure them so that fear does not spread. We are trying our best to do that," she said.
