University students protest against Razakars, war criminals on Victory Day
2025-12-16T16:23:04+06:00 | Star Online report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/university-students-protest-against-razakars-war-criminals-victory-day-4059881

Students in Dhaka University, Jagannath University, and Chittagong University held separate protest programmes today, expressing opposition to the Razakars and war criminals of the 1971 Liberation War.

At Dhaka University, students threw shoes at a photograph of Ghulam Azam, former ameer of Jamaat-e-Islami and a convicted war criminal, in Madhur Canteen area around 1:30pm. Protesters said the programme was aimed at denouncing Razakars and reaffirming the spirit of the Liberation War.

At Jagannath University, students staged a similar programme around 12:30pm at the sculpture square on campus. They threw shoes at symbolic images in protest against what they alleged was an attempt to prevent them from drawing and trampling the Pakistani flag the previous night. During the programme, students chanted anti-Pakistan and anti-Razakar slogans.

Asif Hossain, a student of the 2021-22 session of the Philosophy department at JnU, said, "Students were prevented from drawing and trampling the Pakistani flag as a mark of protest. Today's programme was organised in response to that incident."

Earlier last night, tensions flared at JnU after students alleged that the university administration obstructed their attempts to draw and trample the Pakistani flag. In protest, leaders and activists of the JnU unit of Jatiyatabadi Chhatra Dal demonstrated an overnight blockade of the vice-chancellor's vehicle.

Meanwhile, at Chittagong University, portraits of convicted war criminal Ghulam Azam and CU Pro-Vice Chancellor (Academic) Prof Dr Shamin Uddin Khan were painted on the walkway this morning. The portraits had been drawn in front of the university's administrative building a day earlier as a part of a protest demanding the resignation of Prof Shamim Uddin over his controversial remarks regarding the martyred intellectuals of the Liberation War.

A student involved in drawing the portraits, who wished to remain anonymous, said the act was a symbolic protest against what they termed derogatory remarks about the martyred intellectuals and to press home the demand for the pro-vice chancellor's resignation.

CU proctor Prof Dr Hossain Shahid Sarwardu said he was not aware of who had painted over the portraits.

Our DU, CU, and JnU correspondents contributed to this report.
