Liberation War dep commander AK Khandker laid to eternal rest
2025-12-22T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/liberation-war-dep-commander-ak-khandker-laid-eternal-rest-4063636

Abdul Karim Khandker, former deputy commander of the Liberation War and the first chief of the Bangladesh Air Force, was laid to rest with full state honours yesterday.

Khandker, who was awarded Bir Uttam, was buried at the Shaheen Graveyard at BAF Base Bashar in the capital, said an ISPR press release.

Earlier, his namaz-e-janaza and a funeral parade were held at the BAF Base Bashar Parade Ground after Zohr prayers.

The imam of the BAF Base Bashar central mosque conducted the janaza, attended by advisers of the interim government, chiefs of the three services, senior civil and military officials, and members of the armed forces.

Earlier, pallbearers slow-marched the coffin to the stage while a funeral parade was held, according a state salute to Khandker.

BAF Air Secretary Air Vice Marshal Abdullah Al Mamun read out the war hero's biography. Khandker's son, Jafrul Karim Khandker, also spoke.

Following the prayers, tributes poured in.

On behalf of President Mohammed Shahabuddin, his military secretary paid homage to Khandker by placing a wreath on his coffin.

Chief Adviser Prof Muhammad Yunus, Chief of Army Staff General Waker-Uz-Zaman, Chief of Naval Staff Admiral M Nazmul Hassan, and Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Hasan Mahmood Khan, and Liberation War Affairs Adviser Faruk E Azam, Bir Protik, also paid homage to the Liberation War organiser.

A fly-past featuring BAF helicopters was also displayed.

Khandker breathed his last around 10:35am on Saturday aged 95.

Born on January 1, 1930, Khandker was a distinguished figure in national history. He played a pivotal role in the Liberation War as deputy chief of staff.

On December 16, 1971, Khandker was present during the Pakistani forces' surrender at the Race Course Maidan as the representative of Bangladesh.

He also served as a diplomat, and became the planning minister after being elected to parliament from Pabna-2 constituency in 2009.
