Bangladesh’s existence rooted in Liberation War
2026-01-06T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/bangladeshs-existence-rooted-liberation-war-4074286

The existence of Bangladesh would not have been possible without the 1971 Liberation War, BNP acting chairman Tarique Rahman said yesterday.

Describing the Liberation War as the foundation of Bangladesh, he said the BNP believes the country will move forward while upholding the aspirations of the '71 Liberation War, and the '90 and '24 mass uprisings.

He emphasised his vision of creating a liberal, democratic, and welfare-oriented state and wanted to work in that direction.

Tarique made the remarks during a meeting at the Gulshan chairperson's office with leaders of the left-wing alliance "Democratic United Front", a confirmation made by Razequzzaman Ratan, assistant general secretary of Bangladesher Samajtantrik Dal (BSD), in a press release.

Leaders also discussed the country's overall political and law and order, as well as various issues related to the upcoming national election.

In the meeting, BNP and front leaders said they believe that there will be ideological differences and differing opinions in politics, but they agree on ensuring the freedom to express constructive criticism and opinions.

"Both leaders agree that in the past, critics were tortured by the previous government by labelling them as traitors and against development. They agree that no one should be able to do this in future," read the release.

The front leaders told Tarique, "After the mass uprising of 2024, an opportunity has been created to bring the country back to the path of the Liberation War. But the anti-independence group is pushing for extreme communalism in the country. They want to erase the Liberation War and take the country back to 1947."

The Democratic United Front delegation included CPB Presidium member Mujahidul Islam Selim, President Kazi Sajjad Jahir Chandan, General Secretary Abdullah Al Kafi Ratan, among others.

BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir was also present at the meeting.

Later, a four-member delegation of Ganosamhati Andolan, led by its Chief Coordinator Zonayed Saki, also met Tarique and discussed various issues related to politics and the upcoming election.

Nagorik Oikya President Mahmudur Rahman Manna, Amar Bangladesh (AB) Party Chairman Mojibur Rahman Monju, Labour Party Chairman Mostafizur Rahman Iran, and Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam leader Junaid Al Habib, and among others, also held a meeting with the BNP acting chairman separately.

VISIT

Tarique is likely to visit his ancestral home and constituency in Bogura next Sunday, January 11.

He is expected to leave for Bogura from his Gulshan residence in the morning. Upon his arrival, he will attend a doa mahfil for late BNP chairperson Khaleda Zia and later visit the house of Abu Sayed, who was killed during the mass uprising, in Rangpur, Rezaul Karim Badsha, Bogura BNP president, told this newspaper.

This will be Tarique's first visit to his ancestral home in Bogura after 19 years, the BNP leader added.

Tarique's father, BNP founder and former president Ziaur Rahman, has his ancestral home in Gabtali upazila of the district.

Party leaders said this would be his first trip outside Dhaka after returning home from London. Tarique last visited Bogura in 2006.

In the upcoming national election, Tarique will contest from the Bogura-6 (Sadar) for the first time, in addition to Dhaka-17.

From 1991 to 2008, Khaleda ran in every national election from the Bogura-7 as the party's candidate and won each election by a large margin.

BNP leader Rezaul said Tarique would travel by road from Bogura to Rangpur, where he would visit the grave of Abu Sayed.

CONDOLENCE MESSAGE

A condolence message sent by Chief Adviser Prof Muhammad Yunus over the death of Khaleda was handed over to Tarique.

Chief Adviser's Private Secretary Shazeeb M Khairul Islam delivered the message to Tarique at the BNP chairperson's Gulshan office.

In the message, Yunus expressed deep sorrow and grief at the death of Khaleda, describing her as a symbol of the country's democratic movement.

Yesterday marked the final day of BNP's seven-day mourning following the death of party chief.

BNP senior leader Abdul Moyeen Khan described Khaleda as an exceptional leader whose name is closely linked with Bangladesh's political journey, democratic movement, and the long struggle to establish people's voting and fundamental rights.

He told reporters after visiting her grave at Zia Udyan in the capital.
