A truth teller of 1971
2026-01-26T05:02:30+06:00 | Diplomatic Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/diplomacy/news/truth-teller-1971-4090551

Veteran British journalist Sir Mark Tully, widely recognised in Bangladesh for his truthful depiction of atrocities during the Liberation War of 1971, passed away at a hospital in India yesterday. He was 90.

Tully, known to millions as the broadcaster’s “voice of India”, covered defining moments across the subcontinent.

“Sir Mark opened India to the world through his reporting, bringing the vibrancy and diversity of the country to audiences in the UK and around the world,” BBC News interim chief Jonathan Munro said in a statement.

In 2012, Bangladesh named him a Foreign Friend of Bangladesh for his role in exposing the true face of the Liberation War to the world.

During the war, when news media controlled by the then Pakistani junta carried government propaganda, his BBC radio reports became the people’s chief source of authentic information. He covered the war extensively for the BBC and documented events from close quarters.

Sir Mark Tully was born in Kolkata on October 24, 1935, into a British family. Shortly after World War II, at the age of nine, he moved to Britain for his education. Tully studied theology at Cambridge University before joining a seminary.

He returned to India in 1965, joining the BBC in New Delhi as an office administrator.

After a brief stint in London at the BBC’s Hindi and World Service, he was appointed the public broadcaster’s correspondent in New Delhi in 1971.

Tully was named bureau chief a few years later, overseeing coverage of South Asia, including India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, a position he held for two decades.

His fluency in Hindi, a rare achievement in Delhi’s foreign press corps, endeared him to many Indians, for whom he was fondly known as “Tully sahib”. His warmth and evident affection for India earned him the friendship and trust of senior politicians, editors and social activists.

Tully was awarded the Padma Shri and the Padma Bhushan, among India’s highest civilian honours, and rarely bestowed on foreigners.

Britain also knighted him for his services to broadcasting and journalism in 2002, a recognition Tully would later describe as “an honour to India”.
