‘Instead of apologising, they're now questioning why we fought the Liberation War’
2026-01-29T17:01:33+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Thakurgaon
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/national-election-2026/news/instead-apologising-theyre-now-questioning-why-we-fought-the-liberation-war-4093446

BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir today called on a political party to apologise for its misdeeds during the 1971 Liberation War before seeking votes from the public.

He made the remark while addressing an election campaign meeting in Goreya union of Thakurgaon-1 constituency this afternoon.

Fakhrul recalled the widespread atrocities committed by the Pakistan army in 1971, saying many families were forced to flee to India and homes were set on fire.

Referring to his own experience, he said his family home in Thakurgaon town was completely looted and destroyed, including the underground fuel tank of their petrol pump and several trucks owned by his father’s construction business.

Remember 1971 when voting, Fakhrul tells Thakurgaon rally

“All these were done by the Pakistan army. And we know very well who collaborated with them at that time,” he said.

Without naming any party directly, Fakhrul said, those responsible should apologise for their actions during the Liberation War, admit their mistakes, and then seek votes from the people.

“But instead, they are now abusing us and questioning why we fought the Liberation War in 1971,” he added.

The BNP leader emphasised the importance of freedom and patriotism, recalling that former president Ziaur Rahman declared independence and Khaleda Zia upheld the same flag.

“Today, Tarique Rahman is carrying that flag, and we will continue to move forward with it,” he said.

He added that with only days left before the polls, failing to make the right electoral choice would lead to further suffering. Fakhrul expressed confidence that BNP would form the government, citing the party’s nationwide popularity.

He also sought personal voter support in Thakurgaon-1, promising development initiatives if elected.

“If you elect me here, I will, In sha Allah, be in the government. I will create job opportunities for youths, set up agro-based industries, an EPZ, a medical college, a university, and an airport,” he said.

“To achieve all this, there is no alternative to the sheaf of paddy,” he added.

He stressed the need to guide students in the right direction as a key step toward the country’s development.

Local BNP leaders were present during the electioneering programme.
