‘Apologise for your misdeeds in 1971’: Says Fakhrul hinting at Jamaat
2026-01-30T04:01:10+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Thakurgaon
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/national-election-2026/news/apologise-your-misdeeds-1971-says-fakhrul-hinting-jamaat-4094086

BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir yesterday called on a political party to apologise for its misdeeds during the Liberation War before seeking votes from the public.

He made the remark while addressing an election campaign meeting in the Goreya union of the Thakurgaon-1 constituency in the afternoon.

Fakhrul recalled the widespread atrocities committed by the Pakistan army in 1971, saying many families were forced to flee to India and homes were torched.

Referring to his own experience, he said his family home in Thakurgaon town was completely looted and destroyed, including the underground fuel tank of their petrol pump and several trucks owned by his father’s construction business.

“The Pakistan army did all that. And we know very well who collaborated with them at that time.”

Without naming any party directly, Fakhrul said, those responsible should apologise for their actions during the Liberation War, admit their mistakes, and then seek votes from the people.

“But instead, they are now abusing us and questioning why we fought the Liberation War in 1971.”

The BNP leader emphasised the importance of freedom and patriotism, recalling that former president Ziaur Rahman declared independence and Khaleda Zia upheld the same flag.

“Today, Tarique Rahman is carrying that flag, and we will continue to move forward with it.”

He added that in the election, which is only days away, “failing to make the right choice would lead to further suffering”.

Saying the party had nationwide popularity, Fakhrul expressed confidence that BNP would form the government.

He also sought votes for himself personally from the residents of Thakurgaon-1 and made promises of various development initiatives.

“If you elect me… I will create job opportunities and set up agro-based industries, an EPZ, a medical college, a university, and an airport.

“To achieve all this, there is no alternative to the sheaf of paddy.”

He stressed the need to guide students in the right direction as a key step toward the country’s development.

Local BNP leaders were present during the electioneering programme.
