Tasnim Jara unveils six-point manifesto for Dhaka-9
2026-02-01T01:41:16+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/tasnim-jara-unveils-six-point-manifesto-dhaka-9-4095271

Independent candidate and former NCP leader Tasnim Jara yesterday said, “My manifesto is not a set of empty promises -- it is a contract with the people. I have a concrete plan to implement everything.”

She made these remarks on Saturday afternoon while attending a manifesto-readout programme organised by the office of the assistant returning officer at Khilgaon Model College in the capital.

At the event, Tasnim Jara unveiled her six-point election manifesto for the Dhaka-9 constituency pledging to ensure improved healthcare and education, public safety, and greater accountability of MPs, alongside initiatives to address key local challenges.

According to the manifesto, Tasnim Jara said many people die every year due to the lack of timely and adequate medical treatment. “If elected, I will work to ensure improved and standard healthcare services in Dhaka-9 using my professional experience,” she said, adding that community clinics would be strengthened and their services expanded.

She pledged to improve the education system through language clubs, libraries, and technology-based learning facilities in schools. Ensuring public safety -- particularly for women and children -- would be prioritised.

According to law and order, Tasnim Jara said initiatives would be taken to curb drug abuse in the constituency and that strict action would be taken against drug traders.

Regarding accountability, she said many MPs become inaccessible after elections -- a culture she vowed to change. She announced plans to establish a permanent constituency office that would remain open in the evenings to accommodate working people.

“No complaint will remain unresolved or buried in files,” she said, adding that a digital dashboard would be introduced to allow citizens to track the status of their complaints without the need for intermediaries or protocol.

Tasnim Jara said she is not a professional politician and entered politics following the July mass uprising to promote a new brand of transparent and accountable politics. “This manifesto is not a set of empty promises -- it is a contract with the people. I have entered the field with a concrete plan to implement everything,” she said.

She also said that personal engagement and trust are more effective than displays of power like use of posters, loudspeakers, and showdowns.

Seeking public support, she urged voters to elect her by voting for the football symbol and to share her message with Dhaka-9 voters who aspire to see a new kind of politics in Bangladesh.

Earlier, on January 24, Tasnim Jara published her manifesto on her verified Facebook page.
