Nation honours language martyrs
2026-02-21T02:28:16+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nation-honours-language-martyrs-4110996

As the clock struck midnight and the familiar melody of “Amar Bhaiyer Rokte Rangano” drifted through the air, the nation paid homage to the Language Movement martyrs.

It was a solemn tribute to those who sacrificed their lives for the recognition of Bangla as a state language on this day in 1952 -- the language heroes.

The Ekushey observance began with the laying of wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar in the capital.

President Mohammed Shahabuddin and Prime Minister Tarique Rahman led the nation in paying tribute shortly after midnight, marking Amar Ekushey and International Mother Language Day. Dhaka University Vice-Chancellor Prof Niaz Ahmed Khan received them on arrival.

At 12:01am, the president placed a wreath and stood in solemn silence. The prime minister reached the Shaheed Minar at 12:04am and laid his wreath around 12:07am, observing a moment of silence in honour of the language heroes. A doa was offered in his presence.

Tarique later led his cabinet colleagues to lay another wreath, and placed one as chairman of the BNP. At 12:18am, he, along with his wife Zubaida Rahman and daughter Zaima Rahman, offered tributes on behalf of the family.

After the prime minister’s departure, Jamaat-e-Islami Ameer and Leader of the Opposition Shafiqur Rahman led his 11-party alliance in placing a wreath at 12:23am and offered doa. Leaders of the alliance, including National Citizen Party’s Nahid Islam and Hasnat Abdullah, accompanied him.

Chief of Army Staff General Waker-Uz-Zaman, Chief of Naval Staff Admiral M Nazmul Hassan, and Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Hasan Mahmood Khan placed a wreath. Chief Justice Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury, Chief Election Commissioner AMM Nasir Uddin, foreign diplomats, invited guests, senior military and civil officials, and Dhaka University teachers also paid homage.

Thereafter, barefoot and wearing black badges, people from all walks of life streamed to the altar with flowers, bowing their heads in respect.

On this day in 1952, students and citizens defied Section 144 and took to the streets of Dhaka to protest the then Pakistani government’s refusal to recognise Bangla as a state language, and its imposition of Urdu as the sole state language of Pakistan.

Salam, Barkat, Rafiq, Jabbar and others were killed in police firing as a procession emerged from the Dhaka University campus.

Their sacrifice became a seed of resistance, inspiring the nation’s struggle for rights and, ultimately, independence.

The day is observed globally as International Mother Language Day after UNESCO recognised February 21 in 1999.

In separate messages marking the occasion, the president and the prime minister called for collective efforts to uphold linguistic diversity.

In his message, the prime minister urged all to preserve the country’s linguistic heritage, ensure the proper cultivation of Bangla, and protect cultural identity.

He said the government remains committed to advancing democracy, honouring the Language Martyrs, the heroes of 1971, the victims of the 2024 mass uprising, and all who sacrificed for democratic ideals.

The day is a public holiday. The national flag flies at half-mast at educational institutions, government and autonomous offices, and private establishments across the country.

Newspapers have published special supplements, television channels are airing special programmes, while the cultural affairs ministry and social and cultural groups have organised observances nationwide.
