Jamaat chief cites 'state protocol' after paying tribute to language martyrs
2026-02-21T14:10:04+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/jamaat-chief-cites-constitutional-obligation-tribute-language-martyrs-4111251

The appearance of Jamaat-e-Islami Ameer Shafiqur Rahman at the Central Shaheed Minar early today has sparked a debate across political and social circles, piquing interest around this "unprecedented" visit.

This had been the first time in 74 years since the 1952 Language Movement, that a chief of the Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami had laid a wreath at the Central Shaheed Minar to pay tribute to the language martyrs.

Although other parties within the Jamaat alliance have marked the day in previous years through rallies and discussions, no Jamaat chief has publicly paid floral tribute at the monument.

Asked why Jamaat had not laid flowers before and what prompted the visit this year, Shafiqur cited "state protocol".

“As part of state protocol, it is my responsibility,” he said. “As the leader of the opposition, I had to come with my colleagues, so I have.”

Currently serving as leader of the opposition in parliament, Shafiqur went to Shaheed Minar with members of the opposition alliance and paid tribute after the president, the prime minister and cabinet members. After placing wreaths, he offered a quick prayer and then spoke to reporters.

When asked whether the party still considers the act paying tribute with floral wreaths “najayez” (religiously impermissible), Shafiqur reacted, “Why are you asking such a question on such a solemn day? It is better not to ask such questions.”

In his remarks, he broadened the scope of remembrance beyond the Language Movement martyrs.

“We remember with due respect those who were martyred in 1947 before the Language Movement martyrs. We remember the martyrs of ’52, of ’71, of the 1990 mass uprising, and those martyred at the hands of fascism,” he said.

“Especially those who were martyred during the 15-and-a-half years of fascist rule, we remember them all with respect. And finally, we remember those who were martyred as July fighters while striving to establish the nation’s rights. We also remember Osman Hadi,” he added.

Responding to a question about whether the aspirations for which they fought had been realised, he said they had not.

“Those expectations have not been fulfilled. We will continue this struggle to fulfil them,” he said.

“Until a country free from fascism, terrorism, extortion and corruption is established, our struggle will continue.”

After paying tribute at the Shaheed Minar, Shafiqur visited Azimpur Graveyard with party colleagues and offered prayers at the graves of three language movement martyrs.

Note: The story has been updated with correction at 2:55pm.
