Is the Middle East’s “rupture” becoming global?
2026-03-14T10:09:54+06:00 | Imtiaz A. Hussain
https://www.thedailystar.net/slow-reads/geopolitical-insights/news/the-middle-easts-rupture-becoming-global-4128306

To Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney, “the global rules-based order” faces “rupture.” He had US President Donald J. Trump in mind. A month later, Trump illustrated how he does it. With Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu, he tried to “rupture” Iran’s theological and military infrastructures.

Iran still stands two weeks later. Bombing US military bases in the neighbourhood alerted European navies and NATO, inflicted civilian casualties, and closed the Strait of Hormuz. Fears of World War III mirror a 2025 “YouGov poll” indicating a near-majority European and US public opinion.

Why does this local “rupturing” predict global war-mongering?

During Israel’s 12-day bombings in 2025, Iran trumped Trump’s quick victory plan: to not impact the November mid-term elections. Over half a dozen of Iran’s neighbours, even more US military bases, refineries, and the US embassy in Riyadh were hit by Iranian missiles. A day after Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian publicly apologised to those civilians, Dubai was hit again, exposing a possible rift between Iranian regular forces and revolutionary guards. Rumours, suspicion, and anger riddle the air, as Israel “ruptures” Lebanese Hezbollahs for serving as Iran’s proxies.

Plots also thicken. One involves Netanyahu and Zionist groups campaigning for a biblical revival. Pushing Amalek — evil force haunting Jews, with Iran being the latest — the “final solution” meted out to Gaza’s Palestinians now targets Hezbollah and Persians.

Of the one-fifth of the world’s gas and oil flowing through the narrow strait, much goes to Asia, half to China, a quarter to India, with Japan and South Korea the rest. Interestingly, since quadrupling oil prices after the 1973 Yom Kippur war impacted western countries hugely, could Asia’s eye-catching economic growth make it a geopolitical player now? By controlling Hormuz, could Trump choke China?

Trump treats China more reverently than his other pariahs, Iran and Venezuela. With predictions of China overtaking the United States in economic size and value later this century, is the historical pattern of mid-century global leadership change unfolding now? Is a regional “rupture” becoming global?

When British colonialism slid into American imperialism from the 1940s, multipolar rivalry was replaced by bipolarity. Europe vanished from the stage, as two outsiders emerged: the Soviet Union and the United States. Negotiations between them converted a “hot war” into the Cold War. Could China and the United States repeat that now?

Carney’s “rupture” cannot be passively finished. So far, only a military foundation permits preaching human rights. Since championing them leaves the United Nations flat-footed, could Trump’s militaristic approach profit from China’s globally inclusive counterpart?

World leadership today echoes the 1930s, with populism edging democracy. Trump’s populism attracts the likes of Netanyahu, just as Benito Mussolini drifted towards Adolf Hitler in the 1930s. No European leader could till now go against Trump.

China’s Xi Jinping can. He hosts Trump next month. Both could eke out fake modus operandi, as Hitler and Joseph Stalin briefly did on the eve of World War II, or a real one, as Soviet and US negotiators did during the Cold War.

Both the “American century” and the “British Century” show a cyclical pattern with rise, maturity, and decline, in stages.

Tariffs are the game-changing weapon. Lowering them boosts trade, growth, and stability. Ramping them invites decline, while maturity mixes both as a preface to inevitable disorder. In short, one world leader brings more peace, but as the number increases, stability diminishes. The Cold War was more stable than the period before World War II, or during neoliberalism, as it promotes competition.

Britain’s leadership began after corn tariffs were lowered in 1846 to promote economic growth, while the US’ leadership began in 1934 to escape economic depression. In its growth phase, Britain launched the first and second industrial revolutions on RMGs and steel, respectively, replacing the East India Company to govern the colony of the British Empire. Correspondingly, the United States signed the Atlantic Charter in 1941 to replace the League of Nations with the United Nations, then constructed the IMF and World Bank in 1944. When World War II ended, the Marshall Plan revived developed countries from 1947 and NATO protected them from 1949. Economic competition was fundamental for Britain, but military strength was the ace card. Britain won the first and second world wars only because of US military intervention. US leadership salvaged Europe from the Soviet Union’s peril. Today Trump distances Europe, but previous US leadership needed it. They were the top free-riders of US economic and military resources, which Trump does not want.

When Trump and Xi Jinping meet next month Trump will sweeten his midterm election approach, China will be anointed as the other superpower, and from both we will deduce the future of war.

An already shaken Bangladesh economy faces a grimmer future. Rationing fuel usually triggers other downwardly spiraling trends. With exports too expensive to ship and remittances from Middle East work-migrants plummeting, households, transportation, factories, and ultimately, development could face and feel unprecedented pinches.

Rekindling solar alternatives demands attention, given their notable usages in rural areas. Converting factories to them and automating RMG production demands attention. Yet, to become a developed country, Bangladesh must shift from such low-wage industries towards high-tech and allow the ECOSOC’s November meeting to make its “graduation” decision. Bangladesh’s upward swing cannot be held hostage to low-wage profiting. Long-term oil price-hike recovery depends on these moves. So too the public desire to shift from hardware job outlets to software. Reinvigorating under-utilised high-tech parks across the country may answer the spark that produced the 2024 movement.

The “rupture” from the war in Iran opens a can of worms locally, regionally, and globally. Increasing distrust within these domains would logically feed nationalism the most, with religious fundamentalism not far behind. Rising above them is the most urgent call of the day.

Dr Imtiaz A Hussain is professor at the Department of Global Studies and Governance (GSG) at Independent University, Bangladesh (IUB).
