Morar Bhita: a ’71 massacre site still frozen in fear
2026-03-26T02:23:47+06:00 | Sushanta Ghosh
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/morar-bhita-71-massacre-site-still-frozen-fear-4135791

Residents of Baruipara in Harhar village under Barishal’s Gournadi upazila still avoid a place known as “Morar Bhita”, which translates roughly to “house of the dead”, 55 years since the Liberation War.

The site, hidden behind thick betel leaf gardens, swamps, and dense jungle, is not safe enough to enter even in daylight, say locals.

On May 15, 1971, around 150 villagers who had sought refuge there were killed by the Pakistani army. Since then, generations of men, women, and children have grown up hearing the stories of Morar Bhita in hushed tones and avoiding the site altogether.

However, on December 14 every year, local freedom fighters enter the overgrown area to pay floral tributes.

Avilash Nandi, 58, is believed to be the lone survivor from those caught in the direct line of fire at the site.

On the fateful day, Avilash, 3, was hiding in a betel leaf garden with his mother, Nirmala Nandi, 55, and his sister, Anita, 7. During the firing, both his mother and sister were killed, and a bullet struck his leg.

Citing what he later learned from relatives and villagers, Avilash said he was rescued while lying on the chest of his dead mother, covered in blood. A bullet had pierced his leg, but a local doctor treated him well.

“Following my mother’s death on that day, I grew up with my sisters. I do not generally go to the site where the firing took place,” he said.

Most residents of the village were Hindu farmers who cultivated betel leaves. The area was surrounded by gardens and jungle, which many believed would provide safety when news spread of the army’s arrival.

However, according to villagers, local collaborators guided the Pakistani Army to the spot, before they carried out an indiscriminate attack.

Freedom fighter Commander Kader Howlader said the army had set out from a camp at Ashwini Kumar School in Batajor.

“Hearing that army had arrived in the area, some villagers hid within the betel leaf garden, jungle, and swamps. Sensing their presence, the army fired at them indiscriminately, killing 152 people, including women, men, and children,” he described.

The population of the village at the time was around 400, and nearly one-third of the village was killed. Most of the bodies were buried in a pit beside the betel garden, said locals.

Freedom fighter Ismat Hossain said although some bodies were taken away by relatives, many remained. “Some 92 bodies were buried there. Almost every family in Baruipara lost someone in the massacre.”

Eyewitnesses carry vivid memories.

Jagadish Chandra Mandal, one of them, said the killings were horrific, with victims ranging from a six-month-old baby to an 85-year-old man.

Another eyewitness, Dhiren Gain, just 12 at the time, recalled how he escaped.

“My brother and my uncle were hiding in this jungle. After receiving the news of the shooting, I jumped into the canal and went to Chandrahar from here. Later, I got the news that my brother and uncle had been killed by the Pakistan Army.”

Despite the gruesome history it carries, the site still remains unmarked.

Villagers say their demand for a memorial to honour and preserve the memory of those killed has gone unanswered.

Yet, the fear lingers.

Tulsi Das, 62, summed it up simply: “We do not go to Morar Bhita due to fear and panic.”
