NCP pays tribute to 1971 genocide martyrs, renews call for justice
2026-03-25T20:08:51+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/ncp-pays-tribute-1971-genocide-martyrs-renews-call-justice-4135431

National Citizen Party (NCP) paid tribute to the martyrs of the 1971 genocide, saying March 25 remains a day of profound sorrow in Bangladesh’s history and reaffirmed its commitment to building a just, humane, and equal nation.

In a press release this evening, the party’s leaders mentioned that the Pakistani military launched “ Operation Searchlight ” on March 25, 1971 to carry out mass killings of unarmed Bengalis, and described it as one of the gravest atrocities in modern history.

NCP leaders said the attacks targeted several parts of the country, including Dhaka, where unarmed people were killed in residential halls at Dhaka University, Rajarbagh Police Lines, and at Pilkhana, where members of the then East Pakistan Rifles (EPR) were stationed.

According to the statement, women, children, the elderly, and members of minority communities were among the victims.

NCP said the violence was aimed at silencing a nation through fear, but the massacre instead ignited the spirit of resistance that later turned into the Liberation War.

“This sacrifice of the martyrs is the foundation of our national existence and a source of inspiration in the struggle for justice and dignity,” the party said.

NCP also mentioned that it is a collective responsibility to present the historical reality of the genocide accurately to the new generation, preserve the memory of the martyrs, and resist any distortion of history.

The party called for stronger initiatives to secure international recognition of the 1971 genocide.

On the occasion of Genocide Day, NCP pledged to work with people across party lines to build Bangladesh as a dignified country grounded in the spirit of the Liberation War.

The party ended the statement by paying deepest respect to all martyrs and praying for the salvation of their souls.
