Witnesses to genocide
2026-03-26T02:55:46+06:00 | Mohiuddin Alamgir
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/witnesses-genocide-4135726

March, 1971. The signs were ominous. There were uncomfortable developments and people spoke of them in hushed undertones. Something was brewing and it did not bode well. The political impasse appeared to have reached a breaking point by March 25. Dhaka seemed to hold its breath amid the suffocating tension.

There were a number of foreign diplomats, professionals, doctors, and aid workers who witnessed what happened that evening and later at night. They spoke of Pakistan army atrocities they had seen that evening. The saw how the army was unleashed on civilians. Others said they heard explosions, machine gun fire and tank shells, and saw tracers streaking through the night sky.

Their accounts, written in dispatches and letters, or recounted to friends remain among the earliest eyewitness records of the crackdown that marked the beginning of Bangladesh’s liberation war.

Archer K Blood, then US consul general in Dhaka, captured the magnitude of that night in words that still resonate. “December 7, 1941 is remembered by Americans, in Franklin D Roosevelt’s [then US president] memorable words, as ‘a day that will live in infamy’. So too should the night of March 25, 1971 live on in the annals of the young nation of Bangladesh as a night of infamy.”

DHAKA ON FIRE

Earlier that evening, Blood had hosted a dinner for 16, trying to maintain a sense of normalcy amid rising tension.

An emergency call from Hugh Haight shattered the calm -- students were felling trees to barricade streets, and key West Pakistani leaders, including President Yahya Khan and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, had abruptly left Dhaka. By around 10:00pm, a second call brought fragmentary reports. The Pakistan army had begun its crackdown.

Together with the guests [who were trapped at his house], the US consul general spent much of that night on the roof as they watched, “…with horror the constant flash of tracer bullets across the dark sky and listening to the more ominous clatter of machine gun fire and the heavy clump of tank guns,” wrote Blood in The Cruel Birth of Bangladesh: Memoirs of An American Diplomat.

He says they could establish there was particularly heavy firing in the vicinity of the police lines and the East Pakistan Rifles barracks. “We could see many fires burning, some of them in old Dacca.” Blood wrote that their head bearer reported one particularly large fire where many of his family lived.

Siddik Salik, public relations officer of Pakistan army through the war, described the night starkly: “the gates of hell had been cast open”.

Operation Searchlight, as the Pakistani army had named it, was launched at 1:00am on March 26. Troops split into groups and moved to Pilkhana and Rajarbagh to disarm the border guards and policemen. They went towards Nawabpur and the old city, to seize Hindu houses alleged to be armouries. Another group went to clear Dhaka University, especially Iqbal and Jagannath Halls, Awami League strongholds. A Special Service Group (commandos) platoon was to raid Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s house and capture him alive, Siddik Salik wrote.

By dawn, they reported their mission complete.

“I watched the harrowing sight from the verandah for four hours. The prominent feature of this gory night was the flames shooting to the sky. At times, mournful clouds of smoke accompanied the blaze but soon they were overwhelmed by the flaming fire trying to lick at the stars. The light of the moon and the glow of the stars paled before this man-made furnace,” writes Salik.

There was a curfew the entire day and it was lifted the following day (March 27) at 7:00am for several hours.

“We hurried to use this window of opportunity to check on the safety of the American community and to begin to piece together the events of the night of March 25, the horror of which we sensed but could not yet document,” Blood wrote.

On March 27, the US consular office submitted its first situation report saying that the Pakistan military was in complete control, that the crackdown on Bengali nationalists carried out throughout Dacca had been swift, efficient… and often with ruthless brutality.

In another dispatch on March 28, the US office in Dhaka reported despite radio Pakistan's announcements, life has not returned to normal in Dacca. It reported a continuous flow of people streaming out of with their meagre possessions. “From their dress they appear to be Hindus, although panic-stricken Muslims reportedly are also departing.”

“We now are informed that Army is attempting to pick up all Awami League leaders including MNAS, MPAs and student leaders. All roads out of the city are blocked, hence it is impossible for well-known figures to slip into the countryside,” the situation report said.

THE NIGHT ALL HELL BROKE LOOSE

A New Zealand-based independent scholar, Samuel Jaffe writes in his book “An Internal Matter: The US, Grassroots Activism and the Creation of Bangladesh”, that the Nixon administration’s response to Operation Searchlight was muted and cautious, with the White House “tilting” heavily in favour of Pakistan.

But for the general American expatriate community in erstwhile East Pakistan -- the military crackdown provoked shock, outrage, and for some, a sense of resolve. The Rohdes were among many such Americans. Jon E Rohde, who was working on cholera research at what is today the icddr,b, and his wife Candy woke up to gunfire and explosion. They rushed to their balcony to see what was happening. Candy watched in horror as American-made Patton tanks rolled out from the nearby military cantonment and went towards the city centre. Their neighbour, Alfred Sommer, remembers it as "the night all hell broke loose".

“I'll never forget because my wife and I were asleep, and we woke up [at] about 1:30am...hearing 'Poof! Poof! Poof!' in the background. My wife says, 'What's that?'” Jaffe quotes Sommer in his book.

They ran up to their roof where they found, Jon and Candy to see Dhaka ablaze.

“... Old Dhaka was just burning in the distance,” Alfred Sommer was quoted by Samuel.

Nearby, Richard and Nancy Guerrant awoke to their night guard calling for help: “Saheb! Saheb! Let me in, they're shooting outside!”

They let him in.

For months after they returned to America, Richard remembers that his young son would hear a car backfiring outside and say, “Mom, they are shooting again.”

Surrounded by an unfolding campaign of terror, during a break in the curfew the next day, several young American expatriates ventured out. As the Rohdes cycled towards the cholera hospital, they saw the burning remains of makeshift houses.

Encouraged by Archer Blood, who told them that he would welcome information (Pakistani authorities had detained all foreign journalists at the Intercontinental Hotel), this group resolved to investigate the violence.

BLOOD ON THE WALLS

The roads were clogged, remembered Candy Rohde, with "streams of terrified people" leaving the city, carrying what little they could. The following day, the group visited Dhaka University, which had attracted much attention during the crackdown on account of its outspoken staff and students. The scene shocked Marty Chen, who recalled, "we pulled up to the apartment building in the university, and I said 'oh my gosh!' because the front steps were just caked with blood..."

Candy Rohde described her first impressions as a shaken survivor showed them inside a student hall: “Tank treads have churned up the ground and massive holes are ripped into the sides of the building. Walking up the steps to the entrance we notice the walls are heavily pockmarked from countless rounds of gunfire.”

They walk through the eerily quiet dorm, speechless with shock at the bloody handprints on the walls, and the floor stained with pools of blood.

“There are red streaks as if wounded or dead bodies have been dragged across it. Although gore is spattered everywhere, the most awful sight to me is finding the bloody prints of a student's bare feet. Wounded, he must have run to find refuge in the bathroom, where the tracks suddenly come to an end,” Candy said.

Henry Mosley, another doctor (cholera researcher), recalls "blood on the walls" where "subversive" academics were killed in the hallways: "it was all an empty building by that time," he said, "the whole town was empty."

Nearby, epidemiologist Alfred Sommer visited the Dhaka Racecourse, where several weeks earlier Sheikh Mujib had declared in his captivating baritone, “This time, the struggle is for emancipation. This time, the struggle is for independence.”

Here, Sommer found the Ramna Kali Mandir, an old Hindu temple, at the centre of the grounds, "all shot up there were just bodies everywhere with machine gun holes in them, babies and little kids... women and men."

In the narrow streets of Old Dhaka, Marty and Lincoln Chen walked through the burning, bullet-ridden remains of Shankhari Bazaar, a Hindu neighbourhood. There they found makeshift houses "razed to the ground" and piles of "bodies and ash".

Each night Pakistan TV News broadcast old footage of Dhaka bustling with life, repeating the government's line that, despite minor disturbances, the situation was normal.

After seeing the results of Operation Searchlight first-hand, Alfred Sommer recalled the anger and incredulity that it stirred in him: "clearly nothing was normal."

WITNESS FROM GROUND

Jon wrote a letter to Senator William B Saxbe on April 17 1971, after his evacuation, in which he described in stark detail how the Pakistani army had begun its genocidal campaign.

Senator Saxbe presented this letter to the senate on April 29, according to the book “Bangladesh Documents”.

After two days of loud explosions and continual chatter of machine guns, they took advantage of a break in the curfew to drive through the city. “In the old city we walked through the remains of Nayer Bazaar, where Moslem and Hindu wood cutters had worked, now only a tangle of iron, and sheet and smouldering ruins. The Hindu shopkeepers and craftsmen still alive in the bombed ruins of Shankari Bazaar begged me to help them only hours after the army had moved in with the intention to kill all inhabitants,” Jon wrote.

Sadarghat, Shakaripatti, Rayer Bazaar, Nayer Bazaar, Pailpara and Thatari Bazaar are a few of the places where the homes of the thousands are razed to the ground.

Jon wrote in his letter, that complete documentation was difficult due to the thorough search of everyone leaving Dhaka. The young medic noted that complete censorship was facilitated with the burning of three prominent dailies -- the People, the Ittefaq and the Sangbad.

“The mass execution of several thousands of Bengali policemen and East Pakistan Rifles is already documented. We also witnessed from a neighbour's house, army personnel fire three shots across Gulshan Lake at several little boys who were swimming,” he added.

According to “Bangladesh Documents” another letter dated April 19, 1971 from James F Ragin to Senator Gordon Allott and his address to the Senate on July 14, 1971 also vividly describes Pakistan army’s brutality.

The senator described how the Pakistani soldiers had executed people at Sadarghat. He said, troops attacked the terminal on the morning of March 26. No civilians were armed in that area. A machine gun was installed on the terminal roof and all men, women and children were fired upon.

Inspection of the terminal on March 29 revealed pools of dried blood on the terminal floor. The washrooms were completely soiled and soaked with blood. According to a student witness, all civilians who were waiting for boats in the terminal were all killed. After the massacre, bodies were dragged into buses and burned. Corpses were still floating in the Buriganga River adjacent to the terminal on March 29.

According to an American missionary living in Old Dhaka, machine guns were placed at the ends of the street and soldiers attacked the entire area without warning on the morning of March 28.
