President, PM pay homage to Liberation War martyrs
2026-03-26T08:57:29+06:00 | BSS, Savar
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/president-pm-pay-homage-liberation-war-martyrs-4135811

President Mohammed Shahabuddin and Prime Minister Tarique Rahman paid rich tributes to the Liberation War martyrs by placing wreaths at the National Memorial in Savar this morning, marking the 56th Independence and National Day.

The president and the prime minister placed wreaths at the altar of the memorial at 6:00am.

After laying the wreaths, the president and the premier stood in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect for the memories of the martyrs of the War of Liberation in 1971.

A smartly turned-out contingent drawn from the Bangladesh Army, Navy and Air Force presented a state salute at that time, while bugles played the Last Post.

The head of state and the head of government also signed the visitors’ book kept on the memorial premises.

Flanked by cabinet members and BNP Standing Committee members, Tarique Rahman, also the chairman of the ruling BNP, placed two additional wreaths at the National Memorial.

On the occasion, special prayers were offered seeking forgiveness for the martyrs of the 1971 Liberation War, the 1990 anti-autocracy movement, and the 2024 July uprising.

Special prayers were also offered seeking divine blessings for Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman and former three-time prime minister Begum Khaleda Zia.

Prayers were offered seeking the welfare of the country and the success of the present government under the leadership of Prime Minister Tarique Rahman.

Jatiya Sangsad Deputy Speaker Barrister Kayser Kamal, Chief Justice Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury, senior BNP leaders, cabinet members, members of parliament, and high civil and military officials, among others, were present.

Later, on behalf of Jatiya Sangsad Speaker Hafiz Uddin Ahmed, Bir Bikrom, Deputy Speaker Barrister Kayser Kamal and Chief Justice Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury also paid homage to the martyrs by placing wreaths at the mausoleum.

Every year, March 26 evokes the tragic memory of one of the darkest chapters in history—an episode that began on the night of March 25, 1971, and led to a nine-month bloody struggle, culminating in the long-cherished independence on December 16 the same year, won at the cost of a sea of blood.
