Liberation War was not fought to establish a religion-based state: Tuku
2026-03-26T22:00:21+06:00 | BSS, Sirajganj
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/political/news/liberation-war-was-not-fought-establish-religion-based-state-tuku-4136241

Power, Energy and Mineral Resources Minister and freedom fighter Iqbal Hasan Mahmud Tuku today said Bangladesh was not created through any foreign conspiracy.

“Bangladesh was not created through any conspiracy of any country. It was born to ensure people’s rights and to build a progressive state. The Liberation War was not fought to establish a religion-based state,” he said.

The minister was addressing a reception accorded to freedom fighters, organised by Sirajganj district administration, marking Independence and National Day 2026 at the local Shilpakala Academy auditorium at 11:00am.

He said the Liberation War was a people’s war.

Referring to the events of March 25, 1971, he said the Pakistani forces carried out brutal killings that night, adding that people seeking freedom continued the struggle during the war.

Tuku also said freedom fighters had joined the war to protect the country, its soil and sovereignty, not for personal gains. “But over the past years, the spirit of the War of Liberation has been misused as a tool to cling to power and for corruption,” he said.

Addressing the freedom fighters, he urged them to remain vigilant, saying the country was not liberated to establish a religion-based state, and warned that anti-liberation forces could rise again if people remain inactive.

He also said various benefits and welfare measures for freedom fighters were introduced during the tenure of former prime minister Begum Khaleda Zia.

The minister also said fuel, which used to last two days at the pumps, is now running out within just two hours. “Where is this fuel going? No one will be allowed to siphon it off,” he said, urging the administration to remain vigilant on this matter.

Chaired by Deputy Commissioner Aminul Islam, the event was also addressed by Police Superintendent Saiful Islam Santu, and district BNP vice-president and convener of Jatiyatabadi Muktijoddha Dal Azizur Rahman Dulal.

Deputy Director of Local Government Division Kamrul Islam, Additional Deputy Commissioner (General) Ganapati Roy, Sirajganj Municipality administrator Shahadat Hossain, Civil Surgeon Nurul Amin, district BNP general secretary Saidur Rahman Bacchu, former commanders of district and upazila freedom fighter commands, women freedom fighters, and officials of different administrative bodies were present.

Freedom fighters were accorded a reception and honored with crests at the programme.
