Ziaur Rahman an indispensable figure in Liberation War: PM
2026-03-27T21:43:27+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/politics/news/ziaur-rahman-indispensable-figure-liberation-war-pm-4136921

Criticising past attempts to diminish contributions of the proclaimer of the country’s independence, Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman, Prime Minister Tarique Rahman today said the late leader was one of the essential figures of the Liberation War.

He said past attempts to belittle Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman and deny his contributions have only reinforced that he remains an indispensable figure in Bangladesh’s Liberation War.

He made the remarks, drawing the attention of the young generation, at a discussion at the Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh (IEB) auditorium this afternoon.

The event was organised by BNP, in observance of the Independence and National Day, with its Secretary General and LGRD and Cooperatives Minister Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir in the chair.

Highlighting Ziaur Rahman’s role in proclaiming the country’s independence, Tarique Rahman, also the BNP chairman, said the declaration did not come suddenly.

Though Ziaur Rahman was not a political activist in his early life but a military officer, the premier said, he (Ziaur Rahman) had long nurtured the vision of an independent Bangladesh, which is supported by his own article -- “Birth of a Nation” --

published in the now-defunct Dainik Bangla on March 26, 1972, on the first anniversary of the country’s independence.

“It was then 2:15am, March 26, 1971. A day etched in Bangalees’ hearts in blood letters. The people of Bangladesh will remember this day forever. They will remember and love it. They will never forget this day. Never, never,” Tarique Rahman quoted from the article, saying that the article reflects Ziaur Rahman’s thoughts clearly.

“What happened at 2:15am on March 26 in 1971… I think this information can definitely be an important document for those who conduct research on the history of independence and the Liberation War,” the premier said, adding, when the article was published, all the freedom fighters or those directly or indirectly involved in the Liberation War were alive.

But, he pointed out, none had challenged the article’s authenticity at the time.

Noting that weekly Bichitra, a sister concern of the same newspaper, reprinted the same article in 1974, Tarique Rahman said none raised any objection at that time either, because those who were there at that time knew that every sentence, every word of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman mentioned in the article was true.

“But, later, we saw many attempts to humiliate Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman. But I said earlier that what is true is true. There is no way to hide the fact that Shaheed Zia is an inevitable character of the Liberation War,” he added.

At the outset of his speech, Tarique Rahman paid rich tributes to all martyrs of the Liberation War of 1971 and expressed gratitude to national leaders, including Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman.

He also recalled war-wounded freedom fighters and contributions of the masses to the Liberation War.

Referring to his earlier remarks on history, he said dwelling too much on the past blinds one eye, while forgetting it altogether blinds both. “The past should not be forgotten entirely, but excessive focus on it can obstruct the path to future prosperity.”

Describing the Liberation War as the most glorious chapter of Bangladesh’s history, he said Bangladesh achieved victory against one of the strongest armies at that time.

So, it is normal that discussion and research would continue for generation after generation about the glorious history of the independence and the Liberation War, Tarique Rahman said, adding, “But in the name of discussion, criticism, or research, it certainly would not be right for us to do or say anything that could diminish the glorious history of our independence and the Liberation War in any way.”

Highlighting the value of independence and referring to the struggle of Palestinian people for freedom, he said that only those, who fought for freedom, can truly understand its worth.

“At the cost of millions of lives, we achieved our independence in 1971 and at the cost of thousands of lives we protected the country and the independence in 2024,” he said, adding, the aspiration of martyrs in all movements, including in 1971, 1990 and 2024, was building a sovereign, democratic and safe Bangladesh based on equality, dignity and justice.

He said people’s aspirations are limitless, but the resources are limited.

“Even though there are (huge) differences between our aspirations and resources, I, as a citizen of this country and as a political activist, firmly believe that if we move forward unitedly and if we all work together, we will definitely be able to build our desired self-reliant Bangladesh,” he said.

Reflecting the government’s people-friendly programmes, including Family Card, Farmer Card, canal excavation, tree plantation, and employment creation programmes, he said, “We have taken various initiatives to improve the living standards of the people. Our government is working tirelessly.”

Stressing on coexistence, mutual respect, rejecting negativity and embracing positivity, Tarique Rahman said, “Let our pledge for this Independence Day be that we will live well in this country, not just as a part of society, but as people from all walks of life.”

BNP Standing Committee members Khandaker Mosharraf Hossain, Abdul Moyeen Khan, Prime Minister’s Adviser for Agriculture Nazrul Islam Khan, Finance and Planning Minister Amir Khosru Mahmud Chowdhury and Home Minister Salahuddin Ahmed spoke at the discussion.

Educationist Professor Wakil Ahmed, Economist Professor Mahbub Ullah, University Grants Commission (UGC) Chairman Professor Mamun Ahmed and Dhaka University (DU) Vice-Chancellor Professor ABM Obaidul Islam also spoke on the occasion.
