Liberation War is our identity and existence
2026-04-05T02:56:16+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Moulvibazar
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/politics/news/liberation-war-our-identity-and-existence-4143831

Local Governm-ent, Rural Developm-ent and Cooperati-ves Minister Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir yesterday said the Liberation War of 1971 is our identity, pride, tradition, and existence as a nation.

“I am very saddened when some politicians try to belittle the Liberation War. To those who want to deny it, I want to make it clear that the Liberation War is our identity, pride, tradition, and existence,” he said.

Fakhrul, also BNP secretary general, added that the Liberation War officially started from Teliapara in Madhabpur upazila of Habiganj, under the leadership of late president Ziaur Rahman and Colonel Ataul Gani Osmani.

“Nothing happened on the orders of any one person. On March 25, 1971, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was taken prisoner and sent to Pakistan. When people were confused by the Pakistani army’s attack that night, Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman declared independence,” he said while addressing as chief guest at a rally of freedom fighters and the public at historic Teliapara, the first headquarters of the Liberation War.

Referring to Khaleda Zia as the country’s first female freedom fighter, Fakhrul said that army members sought her advice that day. “She told them not to surrender their weapons. Later, she went to Dhaka with her two children, where the Pakistani army arrested her.”

Fakhrul also criticised Awami League for ignoring Col Osmani’s contributions and said history must be presented accurately.

Regarding the July uprising, he said, “The people of Bangladesh do not tolerate injustice. Many movements have taken place, and in 2024, Hasina was forced to leave the country. That is another chapter of our glory. Unfortunately, some politicians spread lies that BNP does not accept the July uprising. Such propaganda cannot be accepted.”

Fakhrul also noted reforms initiated by BNP leaders, mentioning that Ziaur Rahman had introduced multi-party democracy from a one-party rule, while Khaleda Zia later introduced the caretaker government system.

“Our leader Tarique Rahman announced a 31-point programme in 2022. We want reforms and will implement them,” he added.

The event was chaired by Habiganj District Freedom Fighter Unit Command convener Golam Mostafa Rafiq and moderated by member secretary Humayun Kabir.

Liberation War Affairs Minister Advocate Ahmed Azam Khan, State Minister Ishraque Hossain, Parliament Whip Alhaj GK Gaus, MPs Sakhawat Hasan Jibon and Syed Md Faisal, attended among others.
