Bangladesh-India ties rooted in 1971 Liberation War: Speaker
2026-04-13T21:25:27+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/diplomacy/news/bangladesh-india-ties-rooted-1971-liberation-war-speaker-4150961

Jatiya Sangsad Speaker Hafiz Uddin Ahmad today said the strong bilateral relationship between Bangladesh and India was forged during the Liberation War of 1971.

“India is the closest neighbour of Bangladesh. The Indian government’s support in nominating Bangladesh Foreign Minister Dr Khalilur Rahman for the post of president of the 81st Session of the United Nations General Assembly is a reflection of a cooperative and liberal outlook toward a neighbour,” the Speaker said during the farewell meeting with outgoing Indian High Commissioner to Bangladesh Pranay Verma at his office in parliament.

Describing the current parliament as “extremely vibrant”, he noted that the opposition is playing an active role, and emphasised the need to identify areas of cooperation to further strengthen parliamentary ties.

In response, Verma said the Parliamentary Friendship Group can play a vital role as a bridge between the two nations, adding that bilateral visits by parliamentary delegations would further advance diplomatic relations.

During the meeting, both sides stressed the importance of positive and constructive discussions on economic cooperation, connectivity, and enhancing people-to-people contact.

Verma also congratulated Hafiz Uddin Ahmad on his election as Speaker and presented a memento on behalf of the Indian government.

Indian High Commissioner meets Deputy Speaker

Meanwhile, Pranay Verma also paid a courtesy call on Deputy Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad, Kayser Kamal, at his office in parliament.

During the meeting, the Deputy Speaker said both countries could benefit diplomatically through the exchange of parliamentary information and expertise.

He suggested that strengthening training and experience-sharing programmes between the Indian Lok Sabha and the Jatiya Sangsad would make parliamentary activities more effective.
