Fazlur’s Liberation War remarks trigger heated exchange between BNP, Jamaat in parliament
2026-04-28T19:08:35+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/the-parliament-watch/parliament/news/fazlurs-liberation-war-remarks-trigger-heated-exchange-between-bnp-jamaat-parliament-4162961

A heated exchange over remarks on political affiliation triggered prolonged uproar in the parliament today, forcing repeated interventions from the speaker and briefly disrupting proceedings.

Kishoreganj-4 lawmaker and freedom fighter Fazlur Rahman told parliament that members of freedom fighter families should not be involved in Jamaat-e-Islami politics, saying it would be a “ double offence ” if anyone from a martyr’s family did so.

The BNP leader made the remarks while participating in the thanksgiving motion on the president’s speech in the Jatiya Sangsad this afternoon.

Referring to the opposition leader, he said, “He claimed to be from a freedom fighter and martyr family... If someone from a martyr’s family gets involved in Jamaat (politics), it is an even greater offence.”

“As long as the Royal Bengal Tiger exists, the spirit of the freedom fighters will prevail. Razakars will never succeed in this country,” he added, referring to collaborators of the Pakistani army during the 1971 Liberation War.

Joining Jamaat a ‘double offence’ for martyr family members: Fazlur

Fazlur said December 14, 1971 is observed as Martyred Intellectuals Day, noting that hundreds of intellectuals were killed by Al-Badr.

“And you all know whose force Al-Badr was,” he said.

He also referred to proceedings on the first day of the current parliament.

“Unfortunately, I could not hear much due to sound device malfunction. In this House, a condolence motion was also brought regarding them. Even if I were alone, I would have protested, but since my party did it, I remained silent,” he said.

Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami lawmakers erupted in protest after Fazlur’s remarks.

The uproar lasted for more than 10 minutes, with Jamaat MPs shouting in protest. At one stage, treasury bench members also stood up, further escalating the disorder in the House.

“Honourable members, please maintain discipline in the House,” Speaker Hafiz Uddin Ahmad said amid repeated interruptions and asked Fazlur to continue, but Jamaat MPs ignored the call and continued shouting.

During the commotion, Fazlur said, “Had they found our leader Ziaur Rahman before December 16 (1971), they would have killed him.”

At one point, the speaker stood up and appealed to opposition members to restore order. Expressing frustration, he told lawmakers that their conduct “would make children ashamed.”

“Such venerable individuals, who have become grandfathers, their grandchildren may be sitting in the gallery watching. What will they think about this?” speaker said.

The speaker reminded lawmakers: “This is Bangladesh’s National Parliament. Every member here is elected and has the right to speak. If you disagree, you may counter with arguments. But disrupting a member while speaking is unacceptable.”

Fazlur’s ‘double offence’ comment sparks chaos in parliament

He warned that not respecting the rules would erode public confidence in parliament

The speaker asked Fazlur Rahman to complete his address within three minutes.

“August (2024) was a mass uprising... Comparing it to the Liberation War is like comparing the Pacific Ocean with a pond, or the Himalayas with a hillock. The Liberation War is unparalleled,” Fazlur said.

“Until August 5, 2024, the role of police was different than what it is now. After December 16, hundreds of Razakars surrendered to me. I did not kill anyone; I sent them all to jail for trial. My point is this: after August 5, 2024, so many police stations were looted, so many policemen were killed. They were not fighting then; they were innocent. So many weapons -- where did those go?” he said.

“The incidents after August 5 should not have immunity under any law. If policemen were killed, police stations looted, those should be investigated and tried. Before August 5, whatever the police did, they were a state force. If they committed injustice, let there be trial,” the lawmaker said.

The floor was then given to the Leader of the Opposition and Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami Ameer Shafiqur Rahman,

Responding to the remarks, Shafiqur said while speaking about his own contributions to the Liberation War, Fazlur Rahman had undermined others.

“No one has the right to do that. He personally hurt me,” Shafiqur said.

“He said that I claim to be from a martyred freedom fighter’s family, and he challenged that. Secondly, he said no freedom fighter or martyr family member can be involved with Jamaat-e-Islami. He must be asked -- why? I strongly condemn this.”

“My identity has been questioned. That is a serious offence. He also spoke about my ideological choices. That is an added offence,” he said.

Calling for Fazlur Rahman’s remarks to be expunged, he added, “From such a senior person, a politician, I did not expect this kind of behaviour.”

Later, when Fazlur Rahman sought to speak again, the speaker did not allow him the floor.

“Nothing more needs to be said now. We do not want the parliament to become heated. Please sit down,” the speaker said.

The speaker added that any "unparliamentary" remarks made by either Fazlur Rahman or the opposition leader would be expunged from the record.
