Who is left behind?
2026-04-28T10:24:58+06:00 | Selim Jahan
https://www.thedailystar.net/slow-reads/big-picture/news/who-left-behind-4162631

In this world of ours, every human being counts and every human life is equally valuable. Universalism is at the core of the human development concept and was the driving force behind the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which asserts that no one should be left behind in the human development journey. Human development is all about human freedoms: the freedom to realise the full potential of every human life, not just for a few, nor for the most, but for all lives in every corner of the world – now and in the future.

Human development is for everyone.

In the context of human development for everyone, we can concentrate on five basic messages regarding the development trajectory of the world over the past 25 years:

One , over the past quarter-century, impressive progress has taken place across many fronts of human development, yet significant human deprivations persist. Boats have been lifted, but not to the same extent, and not all boats.

Two , the human development journey has bypassed specific groups, and they face systemic barriers to overcoming deprivations. It is essential to know who, where, and how these deprivations and groups operate.

Three , mapping of deprivations is essential, but human development for everyone also requires revisiting some human development analytical issues.

Four national policy options for human development for everyone are available, and they must be complemented with global reforms.

Five , the human development framework and the 2030 Development Agenda are mutually reinforcing, and they can inform and influence each other.

Impressive progress, but with persistent deprivations

Let us recognise that the principle of universalism is one thing; translating it into practice is another. Amidst progress, deprivations exist. On the progress side, by 2025, the world had achieved some of the daunting challenges that seemed impossible 25 years ago. Even though the global population increased by 2 billion—from 5.3 billion in 1990 to more than 8 billion in 2025—136,000 people have escaped extreme poverty every day since 1990. More than 2 billion people gained access to improved sanitation, and more than 2.6 billion people gained access to improved drinking water sources. Between 1990 and 2025, child mortality fell by nearly two-thirds - from 90 per 1,000 live births to 30 per 1,000 live births.

On the other side of the balance sheet, some deprivations are lingering (for example, poverty), some are deepening (for example, inequalities), and some are emerging (for example, climate change). One in every 3 people is still in low human development, and 1.5 billion people are in multidimensional poverty. One in every nine people worldwide suffers from hunger, and one in every three is malnourished. Worldwide, 18,000 people die every day because of air pollution, and HIV infects 2 million people every year. Eleven children under five are dying every minute, and every hour, we are losing 35 mothers during childbirth.

Inequality has become the defining issue of our time. Eight billionaires of the world own as much wealth as equal to that of the bottom half of humanity. It implies that each billionaire is worth 462 million people. The top 10 per cent of the global population earns over half of the world's income, and the top 1 per cent of the population owns nearly 47 per cent of the global wealth. Air pollution kills 6 million people every year, and 38 million people die of non-communicable diseases. If climate change is not addressed today, 100 million additional people will be in extreme poverty by 2030.

In addition to these overall deprivations, basic deprivations abound among various groups of people. Three hundred and seventy million indigenous peoples represent 5 per cent of the global population, but 15 per cent of the global poor. Sixty-five million people – more than the population of France – are forcibly displaced, which means 24 people every minute. Fifteen million girls under 18 marry every year – that is 1 child bride every 2 seconds. It destroys their capabilities, limits their potential, and stunts their human development. In 18 countries, women cannot work without their husbands' permission, and in 32 countries, women face different passport procedures. In fact, women face a life-cycle deprivation. If current trends continue, East Asia would need 111 years to close just the economic gender gap, while the Arab States would need 356 years.

Substantial barriers persist for universal human development

Specific groups in every society have been subjected to systemic deprivations. These groups are, among others, women and girls, indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, ethnic minorities, migrants and refugees and so on. Groups of people who remain deprived may be the most difficult to reach - geographically, politically, socially and economically.

Overcoming these barriers will require putting empathy, tolerance and moral commitments to global justice and sustainability at the centre of individual and collective choices. People should consider themselves part of a cohesive global whole rather than a fragmented map of rival groups and interests.

Overcoming these barriers will require putting empathy, tolerance and moral commitments to global justice and sustainability at the centre of individual and collective choices. People should consider themselves part of a cohesive global whole rather than a fragmented map of rival groups and interests.

If the specific focus is on women and girls globally, women's labour force participation rate is 49 per cent, compared with 76 per cent for men. Women do most of the agricultural work but own less than 10 per cent of the land. Fifteen million girls under 18 marry every year – that is 1 child bride every 2 seconds. It destroys their capabilities, limits their potential, and stunts their human development.

Such systemic deprivations are due to various mutually reinforcing systemic barriers - discriminatory laws, norms and values, violence and exclusion. In 18 countries, women cannot work without their husbands' permission, and in 32 countries, women face different passport procedures. In fact, women face a life-cycle deprivation. If current trends continue, East Asia would need 111 years to close just the economic gender gap, while the Arab States would need 356 years.

But some barriers are deeply embedded in social and political identities and relationships – e.g. blatant violence, discriminatory laws, exclusionary social norms, imbalances in political participation and unequal distributions of opportunities. Overcoming these barriers will require putting empathy, tolerance and moral commitments to global justice and sustainability at the centre of individual and collective choices. People should consider themselves part of a cohesive global whole rather than a fragmented map of rival groups and interests.

Legal and political institutions can be used or abused to perpetuate group divisions. An extreme case relates to the rights of the LGBTI community in the 73 countries and 5 territories where same-sex sexual acts are illegal. In other cases, laws are discriminatory because they prevent certain groups from accessing services or opportunities.

Social norms in many countries reduce the choices and opportunities for women and girls, who are typically responsible for more than three-quarters of unpaid household care. Women in cafes or restaurants as guests may also be discouraged, and in some cases, it is taboo for women to travel in public without being accompanied by a male.

Perhaps the most direct and radical mechanisms of exclusion are intimidation and violence. Motives include consolidating political power, safeguarding the well-being of elites, controlling the distribution of resources, seizing territory and resources, and favouring ideologies based on the supremacy of one identity and set of values.

At a time when global action and collaboration are imperative, self-identities are narrowing. Social and political movements linked to identity, whether nationalist or ethnopolitical, seem to be getting stronger. Intolerance of others in all its forms—whether legal, social or coercive—is antithetical to human development and to principles of universalism.

Refocusing on analytical issues and measurements

Mapping of those left out is necessary, but not enough. Perspectives on both the human development framework must be changed. Human development is not only about promoting the freedoms of individuals but also those of groups or collectives. For the most marginalised and deprived, collective agency can be much more powerful. An individual is unlikely to achieve much alone, and effective power may be realised only through collective action.

Voice and participation, as parts of both agency freedom and well-being freedom, are integral to human development. The ability to deliberate, participate in public debates, and be an agent in shaping one's life and environment is fundamental to human development for everyone. Over the years, the main focus of the human development approach has been on well-being and freedom. But as more progress was made on the well-being front, the need also arose to emphasise the freedom of agency.

Identity influences agency and autonomy. People have the liberty to choose their identities, and this is an important right they have the right to recognise, value, and defend. Everyone deserves the option to consider the various facets of their identity and the choices within and among different identities. The opportunity of and the respect and recognition for such options are also a precondition for peaceful coexistence in multi-ethnic and multicultural societies.

Three issues regarding identity have implications for universal human development. First, the space for multiple identities is more limited for people who are marginalised, so they may lack the freedom to choose the identity they value. Second, different groups compete for limited economic and political power and resources, and the deprived and marginalised lose out. Third, even worse, the insistence on a single, irrefutable identity and the denial of reasoning and choice in selecting identities may lead to extremism and violence and thus pose a threat to human development. In most cases, society's values and norms are at odds with those of the most disadvantaged. Social traditions of privilege and subordination often construct preferences. But changing values and norms can transform the situation.

Freedoms are interdependent, and such interdependence may sometimes be reinforcing. For example, a worker exercising the freedom to green the workspace may contribute to their co-workers' freedom to have clean air. But the freedom of one may also impinge on the freedom of others. A wealthy person has the freedom to build a multi-storey house, but that may deprive their poor neighbour of sunlight and an airy environment.

Limiting others' freedom may not be the intended consequence of exercising one's own freedom, but some actions that curb others' freedom may be deliberate. Rich and powerful groups may seek to curtail others' freedom. This is reflected in the policy matrix's affluence bias in many economies, in the way the legal system is built, and in the way institutions operate. All societies have to make trade-offs and, through reasoned debate, determine the principles for resolving issues dynamically as they advance and realise a more just society.

In terms of measurements, three issues need to be revisited: a disaggregated framework to provide a true picture of society. For too long, we have been hostages to the tyranny of the averages. Two: the quality of human development needs to be assessed alongside its quantity. More children are enrolled in and attending schools, but a critical question is what they are learning. Three, we must explore new data sources, e.g., Big Data and real-time data.

A four-pronged policy strategy

A four-pronged national policy approach can ensure that human development reaches everyone. First, reaching out to those left out requires universal policies, but achieving practical universalism across policy areas is difficult. For example, a country may be committed to universal health care, but the remoteness of terrain and locations may prevent health care centres from being accessible to all localities. So, universal human development policies need to be reoriented to reach those left behind.

Beyond access: Building the foundations of Bangladesh’s next education reform

Second, even with appropriate universal policies, specific groups of people have special needs and require specific measures. Their situations vary, and policies must be sensitive to their diverse needs. For example, persons with disabilities require special measures to access work opportunities, mobility, and participation.

Third, human development achieved does not necessarily mean it is sustained. With shocks and vulnerabilities, human development progress may be slowed or even reversed, with implications for those who have just crossed the threshold of basic human development and those yet to achieve it. So human development will have to be resilient.

Fourth, reaching those left out also requires empowering them so that, if policies and relevant actors fail to deliver, they can raise their voices, demand their rights, and resort to mechanisms to redress the situation.

Furthermore, as we live in a globalised world, national policies for universal human development must be complemented by a global system that is fair and human development-enriching. Global institutional reforms should encompass the broader areas of global market regulation, the governance of multilateral institutions, and the strengthening of global civil society.

The human development framework and the 2030 Development Agenda are mutually reinforcing.

The links between the human development framework, the 2030 Development Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are mutually reinforcing in three ways. First, the 2030 Agenda can identify which analytical components of the human development framework strengthen its conceptual foundation. Similarly, the human development paradigm can review the narrative of the 2030 Agenda and identify elements that could enrich it.

The human development paradigm and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are mutually reinforcing. Fulfilling the 2030 Agenda is a critical step towards enabling people to reach their full potential. In fact, the human development approach and the 2030 Development Agenda have three common analytical links.

First , both are anchored in the principle of universalism—the human development framework, which emphasises the enhancement of freedoms for every human being, and the 2030 Agenda, which focuses on leaving no one behind. Second, both share the same fundamental areas of focus - eradicating extreme poverty, ending hunger, reducing inequality, ensuring gender equality, and so on. Third, both have sustainability as the core principle.

Second , the SDG indicators can draw on human development indicators to assess progress toward the SDGs. Similarly, the human development accounting framework can review the SDG indicators and include some that are not currently there.

Third , the Human Development Reports can be an extremely powerful advocacy instrument for the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. And the SDGs can be a good platform for the greater visibility of the human development approach and the Human Development Report for the coming years.

Further advances are possible, changes take place, and transformations happen. For example, Sub-Saharan Africa in the 2000s achieved an additional 6 years of life expectancy – the highest in the world. South Asia, where extreme poverty is rampant, reduced the extreme poverty rate from 45 per cent to 15 per cent just in 13 years, from 1990 to 2013. The Americas have been declared free of measles. People now have a voice; innovations and human ingenuity are evident; taboo issues are being discussed; there is greater environmental awareness.

The unspoken truth: Bangladesh is underfunding its children’s future

But most importantly, a global consensus is slowly emerging on critical issues. Just think of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. What once was unthinkable is now unstoppable.

In conclusion, human development for everyone is not a dream but a reality. We can build on what we have achieved, explore new possibilities, and attain what once seemed unattainable. Hopes are within our reach. For the remaining 4 years till 2030, let us ensure a journey from deprivation to prosperity; from challenges to opportunities, from despair to hope. And in this journey, let us first reach those who are farthest behind. If we do that, at the end of the journey, we shall find that we have done it together, and when we look back, we shall see that no one has been left behind.

Selim Jahan is the former director of the Human Development Report Office under the United Nations Development Programme and lead author of the Human Development Report.
