‘How can BNP be a Liberation War party?’ Jamaat MP asks in parliament
2026-04-29T21:26:47+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/the-parliament-watch/parliament/news/how-can-bnp-be-liberation-war-party-jamaat-mp-asks-parliament-4164081

Jamaat-e-Islami lawmakers today came down heavily on the BNP in parliament, questioning its claim to be a "Liberation War party" and accusing the ruling party of ignoring national crises.

During discussion on the motion of thanks to the president’s address, one of them also demanded the enforcement of Qur’anic law.

Jamaat-e-Islami MP and Nayeb-e-Ameer ATM Azharul Islam questioned how the BNP, founded in 1978, could claim to be a "Liberation War party".

Fazlur’s ‘double offence’ comment sparks chaos in parliament

BNP was established on September 1, 1978, while the Liberation War took place in 1971, the lawmaker said.

“How can BNP be a Liberation War party? You may say there are freedom fighters in BNP, but likewise, there are freedom fighters in Jamaat-e-Islami too,” he added.

He further asked how a party that fought against a fascist regime and came to power through elections could then thank a president who was a collaborator of the fascist. “Should we assume you are trying to please some person, party, or force?” he asked.

“BNP is a major political party. Their women leaders have struggled on the streets and played important roles. But I was astonished to see that in their reserved women’s seats, they nominated the Women’s League Forest and Environment Secretary from Kashiani Thana in Gopalganj. Why?

On security concerns, Azhar proposed introducing a “security card.” He alleged attacks by ruling party activists and said, “I am not saying this to demean you. Think about it. We call ourselves patriots, democratic forces. Yet today, MPs cannot move freely. We are being attacked (by BNP), many of our workers are being attacked.”

Fazlur’s Liberation War remarks trigger heated exchange between BNP, Jamaat in parliament

He claimed that while assisting with government work in his constituency, he was assaulted by BNP activists and continues to face intimidation.

“That is why people joke, saying, ‘We already have so many cards, now please arrange a security card as well,’” he said.

Jamaat-e-Islami MP Rafiqul Islam Khan accused the ruling party of ignoring pressing national issues such as the fuel crisis, rising fuel prices, and deteriorating law and order, while focusing solely on attacking the opposition.

“It seems the opposition is the government’s only problem,” he said.

Rafiqul reminded the House that Jamaat had extended unconditional support to the BNP after the 1991 elections. “For that, BNP should remain grateful to Jamaat,” he argued.

He noted that BNP and Jamaat had stood together both in street movements and in government, maintaining a bridge between the parties until the July mass uprising.

Reflecting on December 29, 2013, he said, “If BNP had been serious and all its leaders had taken to the streets, the Awami League government could have been brought down. But why were the phones of all BNP men switched off -- except Khaleda Zia and the then secretary general? People know the reasons behind those switched-off phones.”

Turning to the present, Rafiqul alleged that the current ruling party appears to be running the country in the style of the Awami League. “This will not be good for anyone,” he warned.

He further claimed that in following the constitution, the government is echoing the tone of the AL general secretary.
