Bazlur Rahman memorial award: Journalism must keep 1971 alive
2026-05-19T02:57:24+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/bazlur-rahman-memorial-award-journalism-must-keep-1971-alive-4179176

Three journalists, including The Daily Star’s Ahmad Istiak, received the Bazlur Rahman Memorial Award 2025 yesterday for their contributions to journalism on the Liberation War.

The awards were handed over at a programme held at the auditorium of the Liberation War Museum in Dhaka. Renowned artist Rafiqun Nabi attended the event as chief guest and handed over the awards.

The Daily Star’s Ahmad Istiak received the award in the print and online media category as the best reporter of 2025.

In December 2025, The Daily Star published Istiak’s 12-part special series titled “Tales of Freedom”. Through yearlong field visits to different parts of the country, the series highlighted several lesser-known and overlooked chapters of the Liberation War.

In the electronic media category, the award was jointly received by Partha Sanjoy, special correspondent of Ekattor Television, and Ahmed Reza, senior reporter of Jamuna Television.

Partha received the award for his report titled “Ek Kishorir Ekattorer Diary”, while Ahmed was honoured for his report “Obohelito Muktijuddher Smarak”.

Among those present at the event were journalists Sohorab Hassan and Mozammel Hossain Monju, and Dr Golam Rahman, chairman of the award jury board and former chairman of the journalism department at Dhaka University.

Speakers at the programme said people would continue to learn the history of the 1971 Liberation War through objective journalism.

They said Pakistani occupation forces had burnt down the offices of three newspapers at the beginning of the war, believing it would weaken public opinion in favour of the Liberation War.

But the forces failed because free journalism could never be suppressed, the speakers added.

The programme began with a welcome speech by Dr Sarwar Ali, trustee of the Liberation War Museum.

During the event, Dr Mobinul Haque, professor of economics at the University of Saskatchewan, handed over a cheque for Tk 1 crore to the Liberation War Museum.

The money will serve as a permanent fund under the Mir Ashraful Haque Research Fund to support research on the Liberation War, genocide, and peace education.

The closing remarks were delivered by Mofidul Hoque, trustee of the museum.

The programme was moderated by Dr Rezina Begum.
