Intern doctors on strike over 6-point demand
2026-06-07T22:39:42+06:00 | Star Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/intern-doctors-strike-over-6-point-demand-4193146

Intern doctors at Dhaka Medical College Hospital (DMCH), Sylhet MAG Osmani Medical College Hospital (SOMCH) and Chattogram Medical College Hospital (CMCH) began an indefinite work abstention from yesterday morning to press home their six-point demand.

The strikes at the three institutions began around 8:00am and were continuing till filing of this report yesterday afternoon.

Their demands include: cancellation of a decision by the Health Education and Family Welfare Division on FCPS training within 48 hours and issuance of a revised directive; enactment of the Healthcare Professionals Protection Act and its swift implementation through speedy trial tribunals; increasing the monthly stipend for intern doctors to Tk 30,000 and introducing a separate pay scale for government physicians; extending the maximum age limit for entry into the BCS (Health) cadre to 34 years; upgrading the BMDC Act-2025 into a full-fledged law instead of an ordinance; and ensuring strict legal action against fake physicians while capping all admission and examination fees under the Bangladesh Medical and Dental Council (BMDC) and Bangladesh Medical University at a maximum of Tk 1,000.

Intern doctors at the DMCH held a demonstration at the Central Shaheed Minar yesterday morning as part of the indefinite strike.

At SOMCH, an intern doctor said physicians at every level face discrimination, neglect and insecurity despite being the backbone of the country’s health system.

Another intern doctor said they had been compelled to start a strike and protest to defend their professional dignity and rights, and the work abstention would continue until all demands were met.

SOMCH director Brig Gen Dr Umar Rashed Munir could not be contacted as he did not respond to phone calls.

At CMCH, the ongoing strike under the banner of the CMCH Intern Doctors Association severely disrupted regular academic activities.

Expressing solidarity, regular students of Chattogram Medical College also boycotted all classes after 11:00am yesterday.

Contacted, CMCH director Brig Gen Taslim Uddin said, “Healthcare services in the hospital are not being disrupted due to the interns’ strike. We have an adequate number of rostered doctors available to handle the patient rush.”
