‘Who killed the intellectuals?’: BNP MP questions Jamaat’s role in 1971
2026-06-27T19:56:07+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/the-parliament-watch/parliament/news/who-killed-the-intellectuals-bnp-mp-questions-jamaats-role-1971-4209491

Noakhali-2 BNP MP Zainul Abdin Farroque today questioned Jamaat-e-Islami’s stance during the 1971 Liberation War and asked who carried out the killings of intellectuals on the eve of victory.

Taking part in the discussion on proposed budget for 2026-27 fiscal, he said Jamaat MP Shahjahan Chowdhury had criticised Home Minister Salahuddin Ahmed’s comments.

“But there is no need to debate Islam,” he said.

He then raised the issue of Liberation War. “I do not wish to inflame the House with arguments.

“I only want to say: judge for yourselves where you stood in 1971. We need not remind you. Just look toward the Martyred Intellectuals’ Graveyard in Mirpur,” he said.

“Who carried out those killings on the eve of independence? Who tried to render Bangladesh brainless? Reflect on that,” he added.

The Pakistani army, with the help of local collaborators, began abducting and killing the country's leading intellectuals, who were the guiding light for Bangalees, from the night of March 25, 1971.

Faced with impending defeat, the Pakistani army killed more and more luminaries in the days ahead of December 16, 1971 to cripple the future nation intellectually.

These shining individuals were instrumental in the mass movements against the widespread disparity and oppressive Pakistani rulers. The movements ultimately contributed to the war efforts, Farroque said.

Jamaat-e-Islami opposed the 1971 independence movement of Bangladesh. Its student wing, the Islami Chhatra Sangha, were members of militia called Al-Badr. This group collaborated with the Pakistani military to systematically abduct and slaughter the country's prominent intellectuals

Farroque said, “When we heard the call to take arms on radio in the voice of President Ziaur Rahman, we were not members of any party. We came out of the university and joined the Liberation War.”

“It is because of the freedom fighters who fought and won independence that the honourable finance minister can present today’s budget,” he said.

“Therefore, through you, [speaker] I humbly request: at least increase the allowance for freedom fighters, so that your name is inscribed in golden letters in Bangladesh’s history,” he added.

Farroque also referred to the July Uprising martyrs and injured, saying they should be remembered, but stressed that the legacy of 1971 should not be forgotten.
