July 26, 2024: Hasina visits the injured, denies ‘razakar’ remark
2026-07-26T04:29:26+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/july-26-2024-hasina-visits-the-injured-denies-razakar-remark-4232516

By July 26, 2024, the state crackdown on protesters showed no signs of easing. Mass arrests continued across the country, while security forces conducted “block raids” in several neighbourhoods in Dhaka.

The Daily Star reported that more than 5,522 people, including many BNP and Jamaat leaders, had been detained across the country since July 20.

Amid mounting criticism for not visiting the injured and instead crying over damaged metro rail stations, the then-prime minister Sheikh Hasina visited Dhaka Medical College Hospital to see those injured in the violence.

She later inspected the damage at the Bangladesh Television building, where she wept again.

July 21, 2024: A verdict, but no breakthrough

Sheikh Hasina denied calling the protesters “razakars”, saying her remarks had been distorted.

“I never called them razakars. They themselves, through their own slogans, identified themselves as razakars to everyone,” she said.

That afternoon, plainclothes Detective Branch officers picked up Nahid Islam, Asif Mahmud, and Abu Baker again, this time from Gonoshwasthaya Nagar Hospital, where they were undergoing treatment.

The then-home minister Asaduzzaman Khan confirmed their detention later that day, saying the three had not been arrested but taken into custody for their own safety.

July 23, 2024: Quotas revised, but protests persist

Meanwhile, BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir called for national unity among all democratic political parties and socio-cultural organisations to press home the one-point demand for the government’s resignation.

Internationally, UN experts, in a joint statement issued by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, called on the Bangladesh government to immediately ensure accountability for human rights violations, end the violent crackdown on protesters and political opponents, and fully restore people’s access to the internet and social media.
