Citizens' delegation demands probe into demolition of Bir Sreshtho Hamidur Rahman sculpture
2026-08-07T13:36:56+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Jhenaidah
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/news/citizens-delegation-demands-probe-demolition-bir-sreshtho-hamidur-rahman-sculpture-4242136

A citizens' delegation visited the site of the demolished sculpture of Bir Sreshtho Hamidur Rahman in Jhenaidah on Thursday, demanding that those responsible be identified and brought to justice. They also demanded that the memorial be restored through a transparent process. The delegation reached Bir Sreshtho Hamidur Rahman Square at the district's central bus terminal around 1:00pm yesterday (August 6) and paid tribute at the partially demolished sculpture. Later, they spoke to journalists.

The delegation included freedom fighter and senior journalist Abu Sayeed Khan; former National Human Rights Commission commissioner Noor Khanak Liton; Prof Robayet Ferdous of the mass communication and journalism department at Dhaka University; Zakir Hossain, chief executive of Nagorik Udyog; Farha Tanzim Titil, a faculty member of the Economics Department at Islamic University; and indigenous rights activist Dipayan Khisa.

Abu Sayeed alleged that groups opposed to the spirit of the 1971 Liberation War had vandalised Liberation War monuments following the July uprising.

"The July Uprising was inspired by the aspirations of the Liberation War. However, nothing can be compared to the Liberation War. The sculpture of Bir Sreshtho Hamidur Rahman reminds us of our national unity. It is extremely unfortunate that this sculpture was demolished in broad daylight. We demand that the administration publicly identify those responsible and take legal action against them," he said.

Prof Robayet urged the administration to explain why it had initially denied knowledge of the demolition and to consult local residents and freedom fighters before restoring the sculpture.

After speaking to journalists, the delegation met the deputy commissioner to discuss the matter.

According to locals, demolition of the sculpture at the entrance to Jhenaidah town began openly on July 13. At the time, district authorities said they did not know who was carrying out the demolition work.

Following a report published in The Daily Star on July 16, the district administration halted the demolition work the next day. However, no one has been held responsible.
