How to help children fall in love with reading
2026-08-08T17:07:54+06:00 | Neda Mulji
https://www.thedailystar.net/slow-reads/wisdom/news/how-help-children-fall-love-reading-4242806

A pet topic of parents, teachers, school leaders and mentors is the decline of reading as a habit among the younger generations. While there has been a shift in learning preferences with children now opting for digital and visual information, it is important to look at the change in parental habits too. A group of 24 parents of children younger than six years were asked how often they read aloud to their children. Only two per cent read to their children at least once a week. The reasons why reading is no longer part of our culture are not just startling, they are also disturbing.

Firstly, the information overload in children’s lives leaves them unable to select productive pursuits. The responsibility to guide, inspire and motivate students lies with parents, educators and mentors who are in the best position to help children allocate their time amidst a tight daily schedule.

More importantly, while we lament the loss of customs and traditions that are rooted in ancient wisdom, we may benefit from making significant strides towards reclaiming them. One such tradition is storytelling. From grandparents to ayahs, from older siblings to neighbours, relationships across social layers were rooted in storytelling. Many of us are familiar with stories of the supernatural — the substances of nightmares and phobias, of hopes and dreams, of inspiration and creativity.

Stories shape children’s mindset, their moral compass, their self-belief, their understanding of human thought, of life’s complexities and challenges, opportunities and potential. At the heart of storytelling and reading is the development of curiosity, thought and knowledge, without which children become accustomed to getting by on ‘second-hand information’ from their families, peers and teachers and we lose the transformative value of reading.

When students have reading circles or library time at schools, they are rarely given the time or opportunity to share their personal opinion about what they have read. If reading is to be transformative, it cannot be a one-way process. If students retell, analyse or evaluate a piece of reading, ask questions and present to others, they gain confidence in self-expression, organising ideas and communicating original thought.

Stories shape children’s mindset, their moral compass, their self-belief, their understanding of human thought, of life’s complexities and challenges, opportunities and potential. At the heart of storytelling and reading is the development of curiosity, thought and knowledge, without which children become accustomed to getting by on ‘second-hand information’ from their families, peers and teachers and we lose the transformative value of reading.

Stories shape children’s mindset, their moral compass, their self-belief, their understanding of human thought, of life’s complexities and challenges, opportunities and potential. At the heart of storytelling and reading is the development of curiosity, thought and knowledge, without which children become accustomed to getting by on ‘second-hand information’ from their families, peers and teachers and we lose the transformative value of reading.

It’s critical to hold on to reading as it is a transformative force that benefits both individuals and society. It enhances knowledge, critical thinking, empathy, communication skills, and economic productivity. By promoting a culture of reading, societies can foster educated, tolerant, and innovative citizens.

No society ever transformed itself without its movers and shakers, its thinkers and mentors. And the growing generations mirror them. So, the question really is: as the mentors, parents and educators pass on the baton, what are the children imbibing from them? Rather than asking why children are no longer reading, we might want to consider who they are watching closely and what habits they are learning. Children mirror their caretakers, teachers and mentors. For them to be inspired to read, they need to be immersed in a culture of reading around them.

Children also need access to a variety of books and the freedom to choose their preferences. If books are imposed on them or they are assigned particular titles, they tend to resist reading. Decision-making is an essential part of the reading process, as is interpretation and response. Children like to talk about what they have read, they need a follow-up and a listening ear. Simply put, all it requires is an adult willing to sit through their recount of the story or listen to their reflections, respo­­nd with interest and ask questions.

We talk often about short attention spans in the age of social media and information overload, but talk less about how we can address this issue by a structured process of giving sustained and generative attention to children. How many adults can have a long conversation with a child without losing interest or getting distracted by their hand-held devices?

Do we understand the children we try to teach?

In a world overflowing with scrolling, swiping and scanning through images, quick communication has become the norm. Reading invites children to slow down and reflect, choose depth over instant navigation. However, children need adult support in this journey. Limiting children’s screen time will not automatically ensure that they will be engaged more productively elsewhere, but having two-way conversations about the books they have read has a strong bearing on developing sustained reading habits. Reading develops curiosity, not the other way around and curiosity is the foundational skill for all types of learning.

This article was first published under the title “Reading woes" in Dawn, an ANN partner of The Daily Star, on August 08, 2026.

Neda Mulji is an author, teacher educator and Fellow of the Higher Education Academy, UK. The views expressed are her own and do not reflect the views of her employer.
