Jamaat holds photo exhibition on 1947, 1971, 2024 to mark July uprising
2026-08-08T21:37:32+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/jamaat-holds-photo-exhibition-1947-1971-2024-mark-july-uprising-4242946

Jamaat-e-Islami held a photo exhibition marking the second anniversary of the July mass uprising that featured different phases when the people of this land rose up for freedom and justice. The exhibition's timeline began in 1947, featured the 1971 Liberation War, anti-Ershad campaign, Awami League regime ending with the uprising.

The exhibition featured photographs from the intense days of the July uprising, as well as images depicting various historical events of 1947 and 1971 and the regimes of former autocrats HM Ershad and Sheikh Hasina.

The three-day exhibition, titled “July Is Not Over Yet,” was inaugurated on August 5 at the Jamaat chief and opposition leader, Shafiqur Rahman's official residence on Minto Road in Dhaka. It was extended to today.

The Jamaat chief visited the exhibition this morning along with several diplomats.

There, he explained why a photograph of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman delivering his March 7 speech was included in the photo exhibition, while one depicting the March 26 declaration of independence by former president Ziaur Rahman was not.

Replying to journalists, he said the exhibition primarily portrays the rule of authoritarian, aggressive and repressive rulers, and Zia was not an authoritarian ruler.

He said the exhibition also includes images from the rule of former Pakistani president Ayub Khan and other authoritarian rulers, as part of an effort to present the continuity of history.

“We deeply respect everyone for whatever constructive contribution they have made to history. We are impartial and realistic about this,” the Jamaat chief said.

Explaining the purpose of the exhibition, Shafiqur said one of its main objectives was to make those entrusted with running the country realise their responsibilities and govern in line with people’s expectations.

He said another objective was to make people aware of their rights.

“July is not over because the aspirations of July have not been fulfilled,” Shafiqur said.

He said the July uprising would find a proper conclusion only when people’s rights are ensured, adding that it would be meaningful once the expectations and aspirations that had driven the movement were fulfilled.

The Jamaat chief also pledged not to become blinded by the lure of power and to remain respectful of the people even if given an opportunity to serve the country.

Thanking the diplomats for visiting the exhibition despite it being a holiday and the summer vacation period, Shafiqur said many of them had left important remarks in the visitors’ book.
