War crimes trial and transparency of justice
2014-09-21T00:01:22+06:00 | Ziauddin Choudhury
https://www.thedailystar.net/war-crimes-trial-and-transparency-of-justice-42574

It has been said that war crimes trials arise from high expectations that cannot possibly be met. Perhaps the Bangladesh war crimes trials have also raised such expectations…. We do know that in a self-respecting nation it is imperative that criminals who aided and abetted atrocities and crimes against humanity cannot, are not, left unpunished. We do know that such trials can also provide a deterrent effect for the future.

The words above are from an article that I wrote early 2012 for the Forum Magazine of the Daily Star in the wake of the restarted War Crimes Trial after an agonizing delay of four decades. When I penned these words, like many, I had some reservations about the completion of the trials, at least the most visible ones, observing due process and giving verdicts that would seem fair and adequate.

Shredding all skepticism the International War Crimes Courts tried successfully and sentenced at least seven people charged with war crimes, two in absentia, within four years of their formation. The reception of the sentencing, however, has not been uniform across the board, particularly in the section that showed more emotional involvement in the process. It is obvious that any sentencing, hanging or prison, will not please the defendants and their followers. But what is striking is that despite the courts observance of due process, a considerable section of people, the majority of whom appear to represent the younger population was deeply dissatisfied with the results. The first resentment of this kind following the Kader Mollah verdict of life imprisonment led to waves of protests lasting weeks and bringing the capital city to a virtual stop. The resentment seemed so unifying and all pervasive some even started to compare the rallies with Arab Spring Awakening in the Middle East. The impact of this massive protest was so great that the Government was forced to bring about an amendment to the War Crimes Trial laws allowing appeal against the verdicts to Superior Courts—a law that later allowed the Superior Court overturn the Trail Court verdict and sentence Kader Mollah to death.

Fortuitously the latter sentences were all for capital punishment except that of Gholam Azam. However, the life term sentence for Gholam Azam on grounds of ill health and old age did not sit well among the section that wanted to see maximum punishment for all those accused of war crimes.

The latest salvo on war crimes verdict that came from the Supreme Court commuting death sentence for Delawar Hossain Syedi again has brought to surface the issue of justice, fairness, and transparency of the war crimes trial.  The focus again is on what is just punishment, and if in awarding this punishment justice has been served.

In any trial of war crimes the main customers like any trials are the victims. Victims want acknowledgement that a crime against them or their loved ones was committed and the persons responsible for the crime have been held accountable and brought to justice. Victims want some official recognition of what happened, and who did it. For the victims this is part of a healing process. In our war crimes trial we often hear that the victims are not just individuals, but whole nation itself. One may ask then, who are representing this nation in these trials? Is it the government, the prosecuting agency, or the rallies of people who are chanting slogans in the street? Will judgment be based on dictation from street or due process of law that is transparent?

One can appreciate the sentiments behind calls for just and adequate punishment for those who sided with our enemies and ran mayhem in the country by killing, looting, and rape. These are unspeakable offences that deserve punishment. But our law also asks us to observe due process in prosecuting and punishing the criminals associated with these heinous acts. Punishment after trial is not revenge; it is a legal course to demonstrate to all that crimes do not pay.

Trials for war are most successful when they have been pursued in stable political environments and where the courts have means and wherewithal to try these cases with unfettered authority. The trials are most effective with high functioning institutions capable of guaranteeing compliance with the rule of law. Given the nature of politics in our country and changes in government we often see that the institutions are not given the opportunity or freedom to operate in the best interest of the country.  This becomes more difficult when politics intervenes and stands in the way of their operation.

The major issue facing us today is not whether a trial led to hanging or imprisonment. The main issue is whether the trial observed due process of law, and whether the ends of justice were met. Going forward we need to ensure that the quality of investigation and prosecution is not sacrificed. We need to demonstrate both to those who are tried, and to the world at large, that the crimes these people committed were proved beyond shadow of a doubt, and the punishment they receive will prevail. That way we will not need to worry that a change in government will mean a change in our national stand against the people who had defiled our people's lives, dignity and honor in the name of war. Our quality of justice should neither be influenced by politics nor slogans from streets.

The writer is a political analyst and commentator.
