Yusuf was Khulna unit Razakar chief
2013-12-30T00:01:03+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/yusuf-was-khulna-unit-razakar-chief-4630

A prosecution witness yesterday said Jamaat-e-Islami leader AKM Yusuf was the chief of the Razakar Bahini, an auxiliary force of the Pakistani occupation army, in Khulna during the 1971 Liberation War. Taiyab Ali Kha, the 17th witness in the war crimes case against Yusuf, said he has known Yusuf for a long time and had seen him several times in Bagerhat's Kachua upazila during the nine-month-long war. The 85-year-old said these while being cross-examined by the Jamaat nayeb-e-ameer's counsel Mizanul Islam for 35 minutes before International Crimes Tribunal-2. Taiyab on December 10 testified that Yusuf had formed the Razakar force that killed 21 people, including his paternal uncle, in a single incident in Bagerhat in 1971. The Razakar Bahini collaborated with the Pakistani army in committing numerous crimes, including genocide, during the Liberation War, killing over three million people and raping more than two lakh women. Mizanul also completed cross-examining Sunil Kumar Dakua and Lutfar Rahman Nakib, the 15th and 16th prosecution witnesses, before the three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan adjourned proceedings till today. Taiyab said he could not remember the date when the Razakar force was formed in his locality but the collaborators had gone there soon after their formation in Khulna on May 5, 1971. “You learnt about the formation of the Razakar force from newspaper(s),” suggested Mizanul. Stating that it was untrue, Taiyab said, “I have learnt (about the formation) from people. Besides, we had also collected information about it.” Taiyab rejected Mizanul's claim that Yusuf never went to Bagerhat during the Liberation War, stating that he had seen Yusuf at the upazila's Kachua Bazar and Gazali, Madhabkathi and Madartala areas on several occasions during the period. When Taiyab stated that he was an Awami Leaguer, Mizanul said, “You have given a false testimony because you are involved with the Awami League.” Taiyab denied it. Yusuf is facing 13 charges for his alleged involvement in crimes against humanity and genocide committed in greater Khulna during the Liberation War. Earlier, the tribunal adjourned till January 15 the cross-examination of Syed Mohammad Amran, the first prosecution witness in another war crimes case against Jamaat leader Mir Quasem Ali, following submission of time petitions by the prosecution and defence. Prosecutor Sultan Mahmud Simon sought time stating that the witness was unwell while Quasem's counsel Mizanul Islam sought time for preparations.
