The inimitable martyrdom
2014-11-04T00:00:00+06:00 | Syed Ashraf Ali
https://www.thedailystar.net/the-inimitable-martyrdom-48740

The tenth of Muharram is the anniversary of the supreme and inimitable sacrifice which Hazrat Imam Hussain (RA), the youngest grandson of the holy Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), made, along with seventy-two near and dear ones, to uphold the true teachings of Islam befitting “the Prince of Martyrs.” No wonder, Muslims all over the world observe the tenth of Muharram as a day of mourning and solemn remembrance. The Shahadat of Imam Hussain (RA) was no ordinary demise. It is rightly claimed: “Although all deaths are sweet for the Momin , the death of Ali's son is unique indeed, for it passes beyond the death that is content with the grave.” The great Shahadat of Kerbala, inspired by the most divine love -- love for Allah -- indeed showed superhuman courage and conviction and endurance, enabling the beloved grandson of the holy Prophet (pbuh) to overcome so easily the well nigh insuperable forces of contemporary evil and untruth. The Holy Quran eloquently testifies: “And say not of those who are slain in the Way of Allah 'They are dead.' Nay, they are living, though ye perceive it not.” (2: 154) Hazrat Hussain (RA) never deigned to acknowledge the title of the tyrant Yezid, whose vices he despised and whose character he regarded with abhorrence. Naturally, therefore, when the Moslems of Kufa sought his help to release them from the curse and cruelty of Ommeyade rule, he felt it his duty to respond to the Iraqians' appeal for deliverance, and with the assurance that the whole of Iraq was ready to rise to the occasion to remove the despot from his throne, he set out for Kufa with his family. But as he approached the confines of Iraq, he was alarmed by the solitary and hostile face of the country. He saw no signs of the Kufan army which had promised to meet him. Suspecting treachery, he encamped with his small band at Karbala near the western bank of the Euphrates. The great Imam's apprehensions of betrayal only proved too true and he was overtaken by an Ommeyade army sent by the brutal and ferocious Obaidullah bin Zaid, nicknamed the Butcher. The cowardly hounds dared not come within the reach of Ali's son, but they cut the victims off from the waters of the Euphrates. Three days and nights of intense agony ensued, but the indefatigable Imam and his dedicated followers endured this unflinchingly. But everything has a limit and the sufferings of the entrapped band became too terrible to bear. As a last resource, Imam Hussain (RA) beseeched the cruel monsters not to wage war upon the helpless women and children, but to kill him and be done with it. But the devil was in the hearts of his enemies and the brutes knew no pity. He pressed his friends to ensure their safety by timely flight, but none would desert their beloved master. On the morning of the fateful day of the tenth of Muharram, the auspicious day of Ashura , Hussain's (RA) faithful band of heroes arrayed themselves in battle formation. No hope of victory was there against the thousands of well-equipped and merciless mercenaries of Yezid. Yet they knew that they had come to fulfill their destiny -- not to win a battle but to achieve a moral and spiritual victory which was definitely much more glorious and lasting than a victory on the field. The valour and indomitable spirit of the Fatimides were invincible and every single combat and close fight was readily won by them. They slew many more than their own numbers. But the enemy's archers treacherously picked them off from a safe distance. One by one the defenders fell, until at last there remained but the noble and virtuous grandson of the last and greatest Prophet (pbuh). Severely wounded and dying, he dragged himself to the riverside for a last drink; the inhuman cowards turned him off with arrows. As he returned to his tent, he took his infant child in his arms but they transfixed him with a dart. Not merely a grandson of the holy Prophet (pbuh) but also a devout and ideal follower of his tenets, the great Imam even in his last hours displayed the highest ideal of spiritual and moral greatness by praying for the very enemies who had killed his infant son and were ready to put him to death. Raising himself for the last desperate charge, the valiant fighter threw himself among the Ommeyade brutes, who fell back on every side. But the grueling ordeal was too much even for the indomitable Hussain (RA), and faint with the loss of blood he sank to the ground. The murderous cowards rushed upon the dying hero like vultures; they cut off his head, trampled on the holy body and subjected it to every ignominy they knew. Hussain (RA) indeed did not die in the ordinary sense of the term. He simply shuffled off the mortal coil and set sail towards the Great Unknown through the glorious channel of Shahadat .  His precious life indeed was sacrificed for the salvation of the suffering humanity, testifying so eloquently to the fact that the brows of the martyr shall eternally reflect the brilliance of the elect of Allah, that those who submit to God and suffer and bleed unto death for the cause of righteousness, truth and justice, for the unfortunate millions that knock about the straits, for the sustenance and durability of their rights and privileges, never decay, never die, never perish; they live a newer life, a fresher life, a higher life, a more sublime life in the recurrent ethos of community and country. In the memorable words of the poet: “Kushtegane Khanjare Taslim ra / Har Zaman Az Ghaeb Jane Digar Ast.”

The writer is a former Director General, Islamic Foundation Bangladesh.
