Charges on which Khokon Razakar found guilty
2014-11-13T10:05:09+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/charges-on-which-khokon-razakar-found-guilty-50135

The International Crimes Tribnal-1 today awarded death penalty to BNP leader MA Zahid Hossain Khokon on six charges of crimes committed in Faridpur during the Liberation War.

He was also sentenced to 20, 10 and5 years imprisonment as the court found him guilty of 10 out of 11 charges.

CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

1. He abetted Pakistani occupation army by showing them path to Kodalia village. They set fire to several houses and caught around 50-60 people from a nearby hideout. Nineteen people including women and children were shot dead by Khokon, his accomplices and the army.

2. Accompanied by the Pakistani army on May 30, the accused plundered and set fire to many houses at Ishwardi village. As people were fleeing for life, Khokon and others shot dead four and injured Fulmoti Begum.

3. The accused, accompanied by the Pakistani army, went to Digholia-Ghorarnara Beel of Kodalia village and burned to death three people. Khokon shot dead one Asiruddin Matubbar of Meherdia village and accompanied the army, who shot dead Safizuddin Matubbar.

4. Khokon along with Razakars and the Pakistani army on May 31 went to Goaldi village and shot dead two persons including a two-year-old baby.

5. He was involved in killing six people at Purapara village on May 31.

6. The war crimes accused accompanied by the Pakistani army and Razakars set fire to many houses at Bagat and Churichar villages on June 1. They shot dead around 15-20 people.

DIFFERENT TERMS OF IMPRISONMENT

1. Between April 28 and May 6 in 1971, Khokon and his cohorts destroyed houses of Kanai Lal Mondol and Jibon Das of Jongurdi-Bagutia village and forcibly collected Tk 15,000 after threatening them with religious conversion.

2. Any day between May 16 and May 28, Razakars led by Khokon and his brother Zafar converted eight Hindus at Jongurdi-Bagutia village into Muslims. The victims later took shelter in India.

3. Led by Khokon on May 27, armed Razakars looted valuables from Hindus at Chandhat village. Khokon and his cohorts also raped two women.

4. Khokon on any day between July 1 and July 17 shot and injured one Kanailal Mondol of Jonggurdi-Bagutia village.

ACQUITAL

Khokon was acquitted of the charge brought against him for abducting 19 people at Bongram village.
