Kamalpur, Phulbari tasted freedom on this day in '71
2014-12-04T00:01:00+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/kamalpur-phulbari-tasted-freedom-on-this-day-in-71-53244

On this day in 1971, Dhanua Kamalpur, the most significant front-line of Jamalpur district, was freed from Pakistan occupation forces. The area falls under Sector II in Bakshiganj upazila. Kamalpur union was along the frontier with Mohendraganj area of Tura district in Meghalaya state of India, reports our correspondent. On the day, freedom fighters defeated Pakistani forces with the help of Indian allied forces. Consequently, first Bangladeshi flag was hoisted in the district. Here 220 Pakistani soldiers, led by Captain Ahsan Malik, surrendered while a number of occupation troops lost their lives in the battle.

On the other hand, 12 freedom fighters including Captain Salahuddin embraced martyrdom. Following the liberation at Kamalpur, other parts of the district started to see freedom from occupation forces. On December 6 Dewanganj, December 7 Islampur, December 8 Melandah and December 10 Jamalpur were freed. Then freedom fighters of the region started advancing towards Tangail and Mymensingh. On November 13 in 1971, freedom fighters, led by Sector Commander Colonel Abu Taher, launched a massive attack on the occupation forces. The next day, Col Taher received major injuries in his left leg due to morter shelling by the enemy forces. Then the fight continued under the command of Wing Commander Hamidullah Khan. Away in Dinajpur, Phulbari upazila was freed from the Pakistani forces on the same day, reports our correspondent. However, people  of Phulbari still celebrate the day without a monument. The freedom fighters hoisted national flag in the upazila town after a nine months of fighting with the Pakistani forces and their collaborators. Pakistani forces fled from Phulbari on this day after the Indian forces entered through several borders including Jalpaitoli and Rudrani points. ON confirmation of victory, people returned to the upazila town and rejoiced the victory chanting slogans 'Joy Bangla', led by hundreds of freedom fighters of the upazila. On March 25 in 1971, the Pakistani forces launched a crackdown on the upazila with the help of its Bangladeshi collaborators. On April 2 morning, Pakistani troops shelled heavily before entering Phulbari. The occupation forces also covered Birampur, Nawabganj, Hakimpur and Ghoraghat upazilas from Phulbari.
