Dr. Nuran Nabi: A Beacon of Success
2014-12-05T12:37:13+06:00 | The daily star
https://www.thedailystar.net/dr-nuran-nabi-a-beacon-of-success-53547

Star Insight proudly features Dr. Nuran Nabi, a Bangladeshi living in New Jersey, USA, who is nothing less than a beacon of success. He is not only an enlightened scientist who co-invented Colgate Total Toothpaste, but also a freedom fighter who fought gallantly during the Liberation War of 1971. He was dubbed "the brain" behind Tangail's Freedom Fighters Forces. After 22 years of working for Colgate-Palmolive, one might have expected him to take things slower. But, for Dr. Nuran Nabi, there was a lot left to be achieved. He went on to become a Councilman of Plainsboro Township, NJ, USA in 2007. This fortnight's Star Insight presents the story of a man whose life is rife with inspiration and success.

Dr. Nuran Nabi obtained his Bachelor of Science (Honors) in Biochemistry from Dhaka University, Bangladesh and obtained a Post Graduate Diploma from Osaka University, Japan. He then pursued a Ph.D. in Cell Biology from Kyushu University, also in Japan and moved to New York University, USA to conduct Post Doctoral research in 1980. He was a lecturer of Dhaka University in the early 1970's and a member of the Dhaka University Senate. Dr. Nabi worked for Colgate-Palmolive for twenty-two years and is the co-inventor of Colgate Total toothpaste technology. In addition, Dr. Nabi has more than a hundred patents and publications to his credit. He retired in 2006 from Colgate-Palmolive before deciding to take public office.

Dr. Nabi currently serves as Councilman of Plainsboro Township, NJ, USA since 2007. He is also a Board Member of Applied Research & Photonics, Inc, USA and American Super Specialty Hospital in Dhaka, Bangladesh. He is a valiant freedom fighter of Bangladesh's Glorious Liberation War of 1971. He was awarded a special citation by the Commander in Chief of Bangladesh Liberation Army for his valor and outstanding contribution to the Liberation War. Additionally, the Far Eastern Economic Review, May 6th, 1972 issue, referred to Dr. Nabi as "the Brain" of the Tangail Freedom Fighters Forces.

Dr. Nabi has recently published a book titled Bullets of '71- A Freedom Fighter's Story on Bangladesh's liberation movement, liberation war and genocide. Earlier, he had published two books "Janmechi E Banglay" and "Amar Ekattur Amar Judha".

Dr. Nabi has been speaking in various forums in the USA including State University of New York, Rutgers University, Kean University, Monmouth University, Montclair University and Philadelphia Community College to build awareness about the Bangladesh genocide in 1971 and, in the process,

creating demand for the trial of war criminals of 1971. He is the founder of many organizations such as The Society to Help Education in Bangladesh International (SHEBI), FOBANA, Bangabandhu Parishad, USA and several other organizations. Dr. Nabi, his wife Dr. Zeenat Nabi and their two sons Mushfik and Adnan live in New Jersey.

This article was previously published on June 04, 2011
