December 15, 1971
2014-11-27T00:01:15+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/december-15-1971-53697

Considering General Niazi’s ceasefire proposal, the allied force declare to stop air attacks on Dhaka from 5:00am. Besides, the allied force also tell the Pakistan army that no truce would take place before the military surrenders. “If the Pakistan army does not surrender within 9:00am on December 16, then the air attack will resume,” they say.

In the afternoon, the allied force enter Savar without resistance. Pakistan troops retreat and ambush them at the entrance of Dhaka on Mirpur Bridge.

The allied force advance towards Dhaka from Savar in the night. Kaderia Bahini join them on the way. They confront the Pakistan troops at the Mirpur Bridge. The allied force conduct a commando style attack in the first phase. Pakistan troops keep firing from the other side of the bridge. Another group of the allied force attack them from the west bank. A ferocious fight take place all day long.

In the battlefield of Chittagong, Muktibahini free few more regions south to Kumira. In the evening, the freedom fighters attack Vatiari, the first protective defence region of Chittagong city. The skirmish spread out till Fauzdarhat.

The allied force advance towards Rangpur. They cordon the town. They schedule to attack the Rangpur cantonment the next day. But that was not necessary as the Pakistan troops already surrendered.

The allied force attack on Kamarkhali Pakistan army base in Faridpur region. The military start to retreat towards Faridpur town. The allied force chase and corner them. The military, led by a Pakistani major general, eventually surrender.

Dr Alim Chowdhury is an eye specialist. He takes life risks to help the freedom fighters. Al-Badr assassins brutally gouge his eyes and kill him. Maolana Mannan, who used to live at Alim’s residence, helped the collaborators to catch Alim.

Indian fighter jets seen in the sky of Dhaka. Governor Malik with his cabinet and military advisors are busy in a meeting in the Governor House. The jets drop bombs on it. Malik runs into a trench to take shelter.

General Manekshaw advises the Pakistan commanders for the final round, saying, “This is the last time; any more attempt of resistance will be meaningless. Dhaka garrison is absolutely under our artillery range.”

Pakistani troops start surrendering their weapons in the battlefields. Pakistani division and brigade HQ in Bogra fall within the afternoon. 1,700 Pakistani personnel surrender. The allied force recover huge amount of arms and ammunition.

Captain Mohiuddin Jahangir escapes from Pakistan and joins the Liberation War at sector 7. He takes a bullet in his head while crossing the Mahananda River in Chapainawabganj during an operation. He was posthumously awarded the title ‘Birsrestha’ after independence by the Bangladesh government.
