January 31, 1971
2014-11-12T00:01:11+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/january-31-1971-53712

Punjab Council Muslim League President Sardar Shawkat Hayat Khan, in Dhaka, says Awami League had enough power to implement the governance policy because of its majority. It is good to have everyone’s unity, but it is not a must, he commented. Sardar Shawkat arrived in Dhaka on a personal visit. Speaking to reporters at an airport, he says he will meet Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to congratulate him on his victory in the provincial council elections and he will talk on politics as per the liking of Mujib. He says, though Awami League’s 6-point demand is opined as a plot to divide the country in the past, this opinion needed rethinking. He says, the 6-point demand will benefit Punjab most among all the provinces of Pakistan including Bangla.

He says East Pakistan’s representation in the military will be on the basis of population. He says February 15 will not be a suitable time to begin National Council sessions, however, he firmly believed that the governance policy will be accepted. He says he will be happy if the policy will be accepted before March 23.

President Yahya Khan reaches Karachi after a brief visit to Multan.

ZA Bhutto left Dhaka for Lahore after ending his four-day visit. Before leaving, he tells journalists at Tejgaon airport that his party will continue effort for understanding and unity for the general goal to find a permanent national structure and governance policy. He says that one will not lose hope on finding a permanent governance policy if views of coordination and understanding are maintained. On the note of a tripartite meeting between President Yahya, Bhutto and Sheikh Mujib, the PPP chief says he never proposed for a tripartite meeting originally. “I only say if the views of the three of us are alike then I think 120 days will not be needed to implement the governance policies.”

Syed Nazrul Islam, AHM Kamruzzaman and Tajuddin Ahmed and other Awami League leaders saw Bhutto off at the airport.
