January 17, 1971
2014-11-26T00:00:18+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/january-17-1971-53728

Pakistan Peoples’ Party Chairman ZA Bhutto says in a television interview that his party won a mandate from the people to change the economic system, follow a strong foreign policy and reestablishment of democracy. In the interview, he says his party will try outmost to come to significant understanding terms with the elected Awami League’s chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Television broadcast the interviews of National Awami Party’s Abdul Wali Khan, Qayyum Muslim League President Mia Mamtaz Mohammad Khan Doultana and other party leaders.

President Yahya Khan speaks to reporters after reaching Mahenjodaro airport for his two-day visit in Larkana. He reiterates his firmness on finishing the implementation of governance policy within the specified time range. He says he intentionally did not mention Sheikh Mujib as the next prime minister of Pakistan. He says in a parliamentary process, the majority party’s leader becomes the prime minister, Sheikh Mujib may not be the prime minister after all. I cannot force him to do that, he says. Notably, the president met ZA Bhutto in his Larkana visit. In response to query on whether President Yahya will sit in meetings with other leaders, he says he will not divulge all secret matters. Responding to requests of speaking on his visit to Bhutto, he says he is the guest of Bhutto. Bhutto will have to speak first and I second, he says. Bhutto says that the head of state will fix what to say.

President Yahya Khan and PPP chief ZA Bhutto sat in an elaborate meeting at the Larkan residence of Bhutto. However, details of their discussion could not be known. Towards the evening, Bhutto tells waiting journalists he had nothing to say to the media today, but there might be something tomorrow. Sources says most of the meeting duration is in attendance of President Yahya and Bhutto alone, but military chief of staff General Abdul Hamid Khan and president’s aide LJ Pirzada joined the meeting for a brief period.

Mawlana Bhasani expresses his firmness to continue peaceful movement for implementation of Lahore proposal at his Panchbibi residence. He says East Pakistan was always exploited and the West Pakistan’s ruling class is oppressing the people. He opined that the Lahore proposal is the only option to end this exploitation and oppression. He voiced his concern on the rising prices of essentials and urges the government to take action against those responsible for the price hike.
