January 11, 1971
2014-12-01T00:01:42+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/january-11-1971-53733

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman reaches Dhaka from Chittagong in the night. Speaking to reporters after a long tour, a tired Sheikh Mujib says he had to rush to Chittagong for the death of Chittagong Awami League’s newly elected National Council member MA Aziz. East Pakistan Awami League General Secretary Tajuddin Ahmed, Khandakar Mostaq Ahmed and Dr Kamal Hossain are with Bangabandhu at this time. Sheikh Mujib will meet the president at some time tomorrow.

President Yahya Khan annulled any possibility of a tripartite meeting between him, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib and Bhutto. Speaking to reporters at Tejgaon Airport, the preident says: “Let them talk matters between themselves. I am no one. I am no separate force. I am the chief of the state and my interest is to meet them and talk.” In response to a query, Yahya says he is yet to decide on a date for the sessions of National Council. He says: “When I fix the date, I will let you know.” In response to query regarding his meeting with Sheikh Mujib, Yahya says they are both “busy individuals. When we get time, we will meet.” He says he had nothing to tell the reporters about the agenda of his meeting with Sheikh Mujib.

In response to freeing political leaders and activists, President Yahya, at Tejgaon airport, asserted that there are no political prisoners. At this point a journalist mentioned the name of Moni Singh. In response, President Yahya says: “Who is Moni Singh?” The journalist concerned anwers that Moni Singh is being held captive under security act. He follows different political ideology. President Yahya says: “And what is his differing opinion?” Another journalist responds that Moni Singh is a leftist. President Yahya says: “Then who is right?” President says he had nothing to say in this regard. He says: “I have to look after 12 crore people. I cannot afford to look after one Moni Singh.”

President Yahya Khan arrives in Dhaka for a three-day visit in East Pakistan. In response to query from reporters as to whether the power handover process will be complete by this year, the president says: “Why such a long time?” He tells them though the legal framework says to 120 days, he hopes it can be done within 10 days.

Pakistan NAP President Khan Abdul Wali Khan calls upon national leaders to concentrate efforts for an acceptable governance policy. He is speaking in a public gathering arranged in Peshawar. He expresses sorrow at the efforts of Abdul Qayyum Khan for conspiracy in the provincial politics. He says the last general elections are a reflections ruled against the protectors of so-calls nationalism ideology. Therefore, now there is no scope for a national conspiracy. He reminded the gathering that it is now the time to form a provincial cabinet, not to dissolve it. The NAP chief says that a key problem of the country is the absence of equal distribution of resources so that the people can have an opportunity to live on it.
