January 10, 1971
2014-12-02T00:00:38+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/january-10-1971-53734

Pakistan People’s Party Chairman Zulfikar Ali Bhutto firmly says that his party will consider the overall solidarity of Pakistan and provide all out assistance for the implementation of governance policy. He speaks at a rally arranged on the Arbar Road in Peshawar cantonment area. He adds, governing policy is a fine instrument, which is why he will not want to bring it down to the streets. He assures that he will give his undivided attention to the matter.

Egypt National Council Speaker D Labib Shukayer, in Dhaka, says the Arab countries will pursue their fight to free the Arab states from the illegal occupation of Israelis. The speech is delivered at a reception ceremony arranges in Hotel Purbani by Afro-Asia Mass Solidarity Organisation, reports PPI. The six-member Egyptian parliamentary delegation arrived in Dhaka on a two-day trip. He praises the people of Pakistan for their unrelenting support for the rights of Arabs. He says, Israel, supported by the colonial forces, are following a policy to gradually occupy the Arab lands. He alleged that Israel is getting the support of bigger imperialist powers in its continuation of its attacks on Arab lands.

Earlier, the solidarity organisation’s General Secretary QG Azmeri receives the Egyptian delegation and assures them that the people of Pakistan will continue to remain one with Arabs.

Abul Hashim, in his speech as the chief guest, says the people of Pakistan will remain in the side of Arabs in the fight for Palestine’s freedom and against Israelis. The delegation yesterday went to Central Shaheed Minar and paid their respects to the martyrs.

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, at a rally in Patuakhali, announced that it is not possible to restrain the rightful demands of Bangladesh and its people’s right to control their fate and the resources of the country. This is the say of the people in the elections, he says. Anti-people forces are confused in the polls result but is recovering and hatching new conspiracies, Bangabandhu says. On the note of an assassination attempt on him, Sheikh Mujib says anti-people forces, after their defeat, are now following a policy to douse the voice of the people of Bangla.

Pakistan Jamaat-e-Islami Ameer Mawlana Moududi blatantly says he had no intention to step down from his position or as a member of the party.
