January 6, 1971
2014-12-06T00:01:09+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/january-6-1971-53738

At a party meeting, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman urges volunteers to remain alert against any steps undertaken by the anti-people conspirators’ quarter. He tells them to remain organised and continue the tradition of last elections in face of any provocation. He advises them to refrain from works that will irritate the people. He says the people’s verdict to Awami League’s programmes is rare in history, and therefore, the party workers must remain vigilant at all times. He tells them to be ready with sticks for defense, but not to use those sticks without the order of high command. The right order will be given after the limit of endurance is crossed. Awami League’s Vice President Syed Nazrul Islam and Secretary Tajuddin Ahmed spoke at the programme.

Pakistan President Yahya Khan says in Rawalpindi that he will soon sit in a meeting with Awami League chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Speaking to reporters at Islamabad airport, he says the meeting will be held after the Pakistan trip of Canada Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and British Prime Minister Edward Heath. Yahya already had a meeting with People’s Party Chairman Bhutto.

Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau arrives in Rawalpindi on a four-day trip to Pakistan. He is greeted by President General Aga Mohammad Yahya Khan. President Yahya introduced the Canadian prime minister to Pakistan military chief of general staff Abdul Hamid Khan, Pakistan Air Force and navy representatives. At a statement at the airport, the Canadian premier says he is hoping for talks in bilateral relationship-related several issues with President Yahya and other Pakistani officers. He says Canada is a long friend of Pakistan and that both countries are enlisted in commonwealth. He will formally meet Yahya tomorrow.

Almost 18,000 workers and employees of East Pakistan Railway begin their strike from 6:00am to press home their 19-point demand. Notably, their demands include compensation for flood and two months’ salary in advance.
