ZA Bhutto had changed 35 pages of Hamood Commission report
2014-12-06T00:00:00+06:00 | The News
https://www.thedailystar.net/za-bhutto-had-changed-35-pages-of-hamood-commission-report-53758

Umar Cheema

ISLAMABAD: As fall of Dhaka still haunts the memories of Pakistanis, disgraced Gen AK Niazi, who surrendered before the Indian army accused Zulfikar Ali Bhutto for modifying 35 pages of Hamoodur Rehman Commission report for clearing his name in his capacity as the prime minister.

In a rare interview, he gave in December 2001, two years and three months before his death, Gen Niazi said his repeated pleas to court-martial him were denied as doing so could have granted him an opportunity to tell his side of the story, a right that was also denied earlier by the Hamoodur Rehman Commission.

While Bhutto engineered the contents of the Commission report and subsequently ‘honoured’ the recommendations of a seven-member committee, comprised of his close aides that had advised against the release of report, Gen Tikka, Bhutto’s army chief; Gen Farman, in charge of East Pakistan Operation; and others were exonerated despite their dirty role, Niazi had told the interviewer, Amir Mir.

I agree with the public demand, Gen Niazi said, that those responsible for the East Pakistan crisis, especially the uniformed ones, should have been punished. Having returned to Pakistan after the debacle, I volunteered to face court-martial proceedings, he continued. But my request was denied by the then army chief, Tikka Khan, who was dubbed as ‘Butcher of Bengal’ for the brutalities committed under his watch, Niazi said.

Tikka did not want the Pandora’s Box to be reopened. “Any such action could have exposed the general headquarters’ inept conduct of war and Tikka’s role as army reserve commander,” he said.

Under the Pakistan Army Act, you can cross-examine and call a witness in your support, especially when your character and reputation are at stake. “Since such an opportunity would have exposed the GHQ’s own weaknesses, we were never court-martialed,” he said. Even otherwise, had there been a court-martial, I would have been exonerated quite easily.

Niazi then quoted a statement of Tikka that he gave to an English daily in January 1991: “We even did not find any potential material against Lt Gen A K Niazi, who surrendered to the Indian Commander because he had permission to surrender from Yahya Khan. But we did not take him back in the army and through an administrative action, retired him with normal benefits.”

“I swear on oath that I was given clear-cut orders from Yahya to surrender, but still I was determined to fight till the end,” he said.

However, General Abdul Hamid Khan and Air Chief Marshal Rahim rang me up, ordering me to act on the GHQ signal of December 14, 1971, because West Pakistan was in danger, Niazi explained.

Admitting the rape, brutalities and massacre carried out in Dhaka, Niazi said he had approached his bosses through a letter dated April 15, 1971, informing them about it. “I clearly wrote in my letter that there have been reports of rapes and even the West Pakistanis are not being spared,” he said. I informed my seniors that even officers have been suspected of indulging in this shameful activity.

However, despite repeated warnings and instructions, Niazi went on, the respective commanders failed to curb this alarming state of indiscipline. “And this trend definitely undermined our troops’ battle efficiency,” he said.

Gen Niazi also raised questions about the integrity of Hamoodur Rehman Commission. The commission did not unravel the whole truth about various personalities and factors, which fueled the separatist movement in East Pakistan and caused the final break-up of Jinnah’s united Pakistan, he said while demanding the setting up of a new commission to reinvestigate the causes of humiliating defeat.

It is surprising that no responsibility for the break-up of Pakistan has been apportioned to Tikka, Yaqoob and Farman, he said. In fact, Yaqoob’s inaction as commander of the Eastern Command resulted in aggravating the situation in East Pakistan. Having messed up everything, Yaqoob deemed it fit to desert his post and resign, while taking cover behind his conscience, Gen Niazi said.

Yaqoob should have been sent to the gallows for betraying the nation. “Yahya demoted him. However, Bhutto restored his rank and sent him as ambassador to the USA. What a prize for desertion,” he said.

Similarly, Tikka has not been mentioned in the report, although his barbaric action of March 25 earned him the name of butcher as the commission overlooked his heinous crimes, Niazi said.

He said it was an unabated power struggle, which finally led to the 1971 debacle, especially when the barrel of the gun blocked the transfer of power. The 1971 imbroglio was the outcome of a struggle for power between Yahya, and Bhutto. “Yahya wanted to retain power while Bhutto wanted to attain it. This was despite the fact that Sheikh Mujib’s Awami League had emerged victorious and he should have been handed over the government,” he noted.

Bhutto’s fiery speeches were not mere rhetoric, but the actions of a desperate man vying for power at any cost, he said. Had power been transferred to Mujib, Pakistan would have remained united. However, it is pity that the commission absolved Bhutto of any blame, complained Niazi.

Bhutto was afraid of making the Commission report public given the fact that he was equally responsible for the circumstances that finally led to the dismemberment of Pakistan. “A sub-committee of seven Bhutto aides was permitted to have a glance at the report. The committee recommended that the report should not be made public.

Bhutto later used his powers to modify 34 pages of the report,” he said.

This article was previously published by The News on December 17, 2013

URL: http://www.thenews.com.pk/Todays-News-2-220682-ZA-Bhutto-had-changed-35-pages-of-Hamood-Commission-report
