July 16, 1971
2014-12-06T00:00:16+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/july-16-1971-53839

Addressing the National and Regional Parishad members, Bangladesh Acting-President Sayed Nazrul Islam says “the sun of our freedom set down at Palashi Amrakanan (Mango Garden) in 1757 and we declared our Liberation War in favour of seven and a half crore people and Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman from another Amrakanan in 1971.” He also says, “Our great sons took arms in their hands only for victory. The countries across the world must give their recognition to Bangladesh as the world public opinion is in our favour. India not only gave the shelter our peoples, the country also willingly come forward to help us considering our rights. I express gratefulness to India on behalf of my county.”

Freedom fighters ambush the four boats of Pakistani army at Balla fighting ground to rescue their confined colleagues at Charan area. Most of Pakistan soldiers are killed when the freedom fighters destroy their boats.

Munshiganj Mahakoma Peace Committee member killed in an attack by Guerilla team.

East Pakistan Jamaat-e-Islam ameer Ghulam Azam addressing in Rajshahi says the central Peace committee has been formed to protect solidarity of Pakistan. The patriot people of the country will have to organize to uproot the anti-state people. The ‘miscreant’ (freedom fighters) have no their own power. They want to be freed on the help of Hindustan. The Hindustan solders occupied the country then how it would be possible to be freed from the loyalty, he questioned.

Barrister Aktar Ahmed, vice president of Muslim League and the central executive member of Peace Committee, addressing an anti-liberation rally in Barisal issues directives to eliminate the freedom fighters.

The anti-liberation force led by Almas Ali formed Rokkhibahini at Dwanbhog.

Rajakars and armed collaborators attack a team of freedom fighters at Gogra Beel area in Rajshahi. They kill two freedom fighters and detain Shamsul Haque and handed him over Pakistani force.
