July 27, 1971
2014-12-06T00:00:51+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/july-27-1971-53850

A fierce face-to-face gunfight between freedom fighters led by Lance Nayek Majbah Uddin and Pakistani patrol team at Tantar and Mayaghasi under Nalitabari Thana in Jamalpur. 16 Pakistani soldiers are killed in the fighting. Lance Nayek Majbah Uddin sustains critical injuries.

Freedom fighters kill four Pakistan raiders attacking their Hiaku camp.

Muktibahini attack the Chotalekha camp of Pakistani military in Sylhet. A violent gunfight takes place when Pakistan soldiers retaliated with firearms. Four Pakistan soldiers are killed in the attack. Meanwhile, freedom fighter Abul Hossan was hurt critically. Two hours after the fighting, the Pakistan soldiers started retreating from the fighting ground.

Freedom fighter Abdus Subhan Bakul sacrifices his life when Pakistan raiders ambush Muktibahini’s Manunadi camp. In retaliation, freedom fighters kill 20 Pakistani soldiers during four-hour-long gunfight.

Another freedom fighter dies during a violent gunfight with Pakistani troops. Freedom fighters kill seven Pakistan raiders and injured many others.

United States Senator William Proxmire and William Saxby, addressing the senate, say, “Obviously Bangladesh tragedy should be ended. Genocide would never be supported wherever it is held on the earth. No civilised people can support the massacre on thousands of women and children for religious belief. Pakistan not only rejected the verdict of East Pakistan people, they forced millions of aboriginal people to leave their motherland. Such genocide is not uncertain future before the people. They still now repressing the civilians, most of the people are panicked there. We think the situation may be worsened anytime there. Thousands of young guerillas already join the force to free their motherland. They started to enter the country completing their training. If Pakistan does not take the initiative to settle the issue with real rivals, the future of not only Pakistan, even of the whole region may be uncertain.”

The first team of Mujahid takes oath at Kushtia united school. Kushtia district peace committee chairman Sayed Ahmad and Ahmad Ali administrated the oath both in Bangla and Urdu.
