More areas to celebrate day of freedom today
2014-12-07T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/more-areas-to-celebrate-day-of-freedom-today-53921

Gaibandha and Noakhali districts and Chirirbandar upazila of Dinajpur were freed from Pakistan occupation forces on this day in 1971. In the morning of this day in 1971, brave freedom fighters, aided by allied forces, captured Gaibandha district headquarters as the occupation forces fled the areas after a fierce bombing by pro-liberation forces, reports our correspondent. A series of bombardment by planes on Gaibandha rail station, Teestamuk railway ferry ghat and important locations made occupation forces helpless. Earlier, freedom fighters damaged all the connecting bridges of the district headquarters, snapping road communications. On 1971 December afternoon, tank and artillery regiment of allied forces advanced towards Gaibandha through Hili border and reached Pirganj and Palashbari areas by evening. They started shelling on the camps of Pak army that continued overnight. Early next day, the occupation forces fled the areas for Rangpur cantonment. In the morning, Mahbub Elahi Ranju (Bir Pratik), first entered the district headquarters with his troop. Thousands of people arranged a mass reception to the freedom fighters at Swadhinata Prangon. Noakhali district also became free from the clutches of Pakistani forces on this day. People of the district heaved a sigh of relief while enjoyed the taste of freedom after months of fighting, reports our correspondent. At different times in 1971, the occupation forces as well as the notorious Rajakars committed massacre and looted Sreepur, Ramharitaluk and Guptanka of the district headquarters, Kuripara and Gopalpur of Begumgonj upazila, and Amishapara of Sonaimuri upazila. At that time, the occupation forces shot and burnt 150 men, women including children. They torched houses, shops and business establishments. They also took the women to their camp to rape and torture them. Taking training in the country and in India, the freedom fighters struggled for freedom of the nation. Heavy gun battles took place at Bamni, Tal Mahmuder Hat and 12 No. sluice gate of Companiganj upazila, Udoy Sadhur Hat (known as Odharhat), Karambux of Sadar upazila, Fenakata Pool, Rajganj and Bagadiya of Begumganj upazila. Many freedom fighters were killed fighting face to face. Before Noakhali became free on 6 December midnight, failing to resist the freedom fighters, the occupation forces started to leave the Maijdee Primary Training Institute (PTI) camp and Begumgonj Technical High School camp for Comilla Cantonment. Chirirbandar, an upazila of Dinajpur  close to India-Bangladesh border also tasted freedom on the same day in 1971, reports our correspondent. Pakistani troops retreated from their bases in Ranirbandar and Amtoli area in the upazila after a fierce fighting with the freedom fighters and Indian allied forces on December 7, said Miminul Islam, upazila commander of Bangladesh Muktijoddha Command Council. The freedom fighters later hoisted the national flag near the post office in the upazila. During the final assault, many freedom fighters, including Abdus Sobhan and Nesar Uddin, were killed in the battlefield.
