Patuakhali, Pirojpur Ffs hoist flags on this day
2014-12-08T00:00:05+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/patuakhali-pirojpur-ffs-hoist-flags-on-this-day-54051

Heroic sons of the soil on this day in 1971 freed  Patuakhali and Pirojpur districts from the clutches of Pakistan occupation forces. Marking the day, freedom fighters in Patuakhali Sadar upazila have arranged a discussion meeting at about 10am today, reports our correspondent. After the declaration of independence on March 26, 1971, several battles took place in the district. On April 26, Pakistani army with the help of 'peace committee' men killed scores of people, tortured women and looted several hundred houses in the district town. The freedom fighters set up camps at Patuakhali Women College under the leadership of Nurul Huda, commander for Patuakhali sub-sector, to resist the occupation forces. Abdul Awal, the then DC of Patuakhali handed over rifles to freedom fighters from the store house of local police lines. Later on the Pakistani army killed the DC for helping the FFs. Face-to-face fight took place between freedom fighters and Pakistani forces at Panpatti village on November 18. At one stage, Pak troops retreated after the day-long fight. In the last week of November in 1971, freedom fighters entered Patuakhali town. After the Pakistani troops left Patuakhali for Dhaka by a ship, the FFs declared liberation of the district on December 6. Pirojpur also got the taste of victory on this day after nine months of bloody battle with Pakistani forces, reports our correspondent. In the history of Bangladesh's Liberation War, Pirojpur was strategically significant, as the area was very important for communications by water ways. After beginning of the war in March 1971, Major (retd) Ziauddin Ahmed, then a sub-sector commander based in the Sunderbans, quit Pakistan army and went to Pirojpur to gather freedom-loving people and formed a big team of freedom fighters. In April, the freedom fighters went to the Sunderbans and launched attacks on the Pakistani occupiers, rajakars and al-badars, from there. They also conducted operations in different southern areas, including Bagerhat and Pirojpur. During the 9-month-war, around 10-12 thousand people were killed in Pirojpur district. Pakistani army men killed several hundred people in Pirojpur town and its adjacent alone taking them to the bank of the river Baleshwar.
