October 3, 1971
2014-12-09T00:00:28+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/october-3-1971-54163

-    Soviet President Nicolai Padgarni visits New Delhi, India in a brief unscheduled visit. He sit for talks with India President VV Giri and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Before departing Delhi, he says Soviet Union offered all possible assistance to a political solution for Bangladesh in line with the understanding between prevailing India-Russia relationship. -    A strong military unit of Pakistan advance in Anantapur and Dhanikunda areas of sector 2. They shell the location of freedom fighters heavily with heavy canons and mortars. At the same time, the ground unit also moved in. Within 40-50 yards range, freedom fighters retaliated with fire. 25-30 Pakistan military troopers embrace martyrdom. Some freedom fighters also embrace martyrdom. The freedom fighters fell back to their base camp in face of the attacks. The Pakistan military continued its attack to the base camp and faced mortar shelling. Pakistan military could not sustain the hits and scattered. About 40-50 Pakistan military members killed and five freedom fighters embrace martyrdom. -    Muktibahini launch attacks on Pakistani military in Tangail’s Dhanbari. Majority of Pakistani soldiers killed in the attack. -    Muktibahini ambush Pakistani military with hidden mines in Jamalpur’s Kamalpur-Bakshiganj road. One car of the military is destroyed, seven troopers killed and six injured. -    Muktibahini ambush Pakistan military in Banpur sub-sector of sector 8. Five troopers killed and four are injured in the attack. -    A guerilla team of freedom fighters launch sudden attacks on Pakistan military deputed at TV sector in Raipur Thana triggering a six-hour long fight. About 50 Pakistan troopers and 60-70 Razakars killed on the spot. 34 non-Bengali EPR surrendered. Seven freedom fighters embrace martyrdom. -    Pakistan government issued a press-note regarding by-polls. The polls schedule for the remaining 88 vacant seats is announced. The polls would be held from December 18 to January 7. -    US government urged its congress to provide $15 crore aid to Pakistan government for rehabilitation of the displaced.
