October 12, 1971
2014-12-09T00:00:33+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/october-12-1971-54172

-    Muktibahini fighters attack the Kalirbazar headquarters of Pakistan military in sector 2. 12 Pakistan military men are killed and four are injured. Two bunkers are leveled. The freedom fighters return without any casualty. -    Muktibahini fighters launch intense attacks against Pakistan military in Garagarai and Sultanpur of sector 7. Fifty military men are killed and 30 injured. One freedom fighter embraces martyrdom. -    Freedom fighters attack a convoy of Pakistan military in Baira sub-sector under sector 8. Two Pakistani soldiers are killed and several wounded. -    Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, speaking at a rally in Shimla, says the refugees that arrived from Bangladesh caused a great threat to Asian subcontinent, Pakistan created a dangerous situation in the Bangladesh-India border. India is ready to combat this, she says. -    Pakistan President Yahya Khan tells people in a radio message that his military is as resolute as a mountain to defend the country. He announced December 27 to begin the National Council sessions and implementation of a governance policy. -    Visiting People’s Party delegation in Dhaka meet with local politicians at Hotel Intercontinental in Dhaka where the local politicians willed to join the PPP. Those who opined to join PPP are former provincial chief Abdus Salam Khan, Qayyum League’s Qazi Qader, Jami’ate Olamaye Islam’s provincial chief Pir Mohsin Uddin and others. -    Pakistan’s permanent representative in the United Nations complains that India had interfered in the internal affairs of Pakistan. -    Jamaat-e-Islami General Secretary Abdul Khalek, on his way to Dhaka after visiting West Pakistan, tells reporters that Razakar force is nonpartisan and are working under the command of the Pakistan military. He says the Razakars are throwing away their lives for the cause of Pakistan. He recommends sending an all-party representative abroad to counter Indian propaganda.
