March 1, 1971
2014-12-09T00:02:05+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/march-1-1971-54387

President Yahya in a sudden radio speech suspends the national committee session to be held on 3 rd march for an indefinite period. He says, as one of the major parties of Pakistan, People’s Party and some other parties express that they are unwilling to join in the National (Parliamentary) committee session scheduled for March 3, this decision has been taken.

Upon hearing the news of suspension of the National (parliamentary) committee suspension by President Yahya Khan, Dhaka city erupts in anger and eventually group by group people of all classes take to the streets, and spontaneously all stores and business centers in the city close down as well.

The cricket match being held in Dhaka stadium between BCCP and International XI is suspended. The audiences leave the stadium to take part in protests and they head towards Hotel Purbani in Motijheel to receive further directions from Awami League chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

Political leaders from Bangladesh deliver individual statements expressing ardent opposition against suspension of National parliamentary Committee session and refer to the president’s announcement as an initiative to abolish the process of re-establishing sovereignty of citizens and delivering/handing over the power to the people’s representatives.

After the Parliamentary party meeting in Hotel Purbani in a crowded press conference Awami league chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman expresses severe/deep objection to President Yahya Khan’s Announcement of suspending the national/Parliamentary committee meeting and also says that the people of the country have refused the decision and deem it unacceptable. In regard of this decision (Sheikh Mujibur Rahman) calls for a hartal/strike in Dhaka on 2nd March, countrywide strike on 3rd March and a rally in Race course field on 7th March as a part of an all pervading agitation or movement. He also says, in the Race course rally the complete policy implications, as a part of the total agitation will be announced. Regarding the current situation, he says, he will immediately hold talks with the political leaders.

Later in the evening he talks about the changed political situation with various political leaders and after the evening he selects a representative to talk to Maulana Bhashani.

Pakistan Muslim League Chief Khan Abdul Qayyum called the decision of the President as “the only correct decision” and welcomes it. In opposition to this secretary general Khan A. Shochib announces to resign as a member and secretary of the party.

That night, President and Chief Marshall Law Administrator General A. M. Yahya Khan, appoints Lieutenant General Shahebzada M Eyakur Rahman, Kha region’s, Military dictator as the Civil administrator/ruler of the state. Deep into the night, Kha region’s Military ruler sends out a new order wherein no news or photograph that hurts the oneness and sovereignty of the nation can be published.

The general strike that People’s Party have called in West Pakistan because of the National Parliamentary/Committee meeting scheduled to be held is called off after the President announces the suspension of the meeting.
