April 17, 1971
2014-12-09T00:00:28+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/april-17-1971-54436

Amidst loud cheers and huge gathering of people, in Kushtia, Meherpur, Mohkumar Bhaberpara village’s Mujib Nagar, Awami League Chief whip Professor Yousuf Ali read out the independence Warrant and through this the establishment of People’s Republic of Bangladesh is announced and the first People’s Republic of Bangladesh Government is established. By this official announcement the nation of Bangladesh through the announcement of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on 26 th March takes on a formal/ constitutional form. Almost 50 local and international journalists are present.

At ‘Mujib Nagar’ in Bhaberpara village in Meherpur sub-division, official announcement of ‘Peoples’ Republic of Bangladesh’ is made and ‘Government of Peoples’ Republic of Bangladesh’ is formed amid loud cheer and applause through the recitation of the Declaration of Independence by Awami League Chief Whip Professor Yusuf Ali. Through this official announcement, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s declaration independence on March 26 take on an institutional form. 50 local and foreign journalists ar e present during the event.

In the newly formed Ministry, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman becomes the President and Chief of Armed Forces and War of Independence, Syed Nazrul Islam becomes the Vice President and the Acting President, Tazuddin Ahmed the first  Prime Minister, Khondokar Mostaq Ahmad becomes Minister of Law and Foreign Affairs, Monsur Ali, Minister of Finance and Trade, A.H.M Kamruzzaman ,State Minister and Minister of Communication and Aid, and Colonel Osmani becomes the Chief of Bangladesh Liberation Forces named Muktibahini. This announcement is made at the event held at Mujib Nagar.

At Burighat, in the midlands of Rangamati, a Pakistan Army launch with 20 soldiers on it come close to Muktibahini Defence Base while identifying the spot, and begins gunfire. Freedom fighters led by Captain Khalekuzzaman counter attacks in which the launch is destroyed with most of the soldiers on it.

An artillery battalion of Pakistan Army attacked on freedom fighters based at Shahbazpur near the Titas Bridge area with their gunboats. After a whole night of battle 5 freedom fighters became martyrs, and freedom fighters retreated to Madhabpur and formed new base.
