Day to remember a Bir Shreshtha
2014-12-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Our correspondent, Noakhali
https://www.thedailystar.net/day-to-remember-a-bir-shreshtha-54538

Today is 43rd death anniversary of Bir Shreshtha Ruhul Amin.

Only 6 days before the victory in 1971, while fighting in a naval ship, he was killed in bombing by Pakistan Army in Rupsha River in Khulna.

During the freedom movement in 1971, he was Engine Room Artificier-1 in the gunboat PNS Comilla under Bakhtiar Naval Base in Chittagong.

After the barbaric crack-down of 25 March, he left his place of duty and returned to his village home.

Then he organised the students and youths of the village and imparted military training to them.

He along with nearly 500 students and youths reached the sector headquarter 3 in Agartala in the month of May and actively participated in the war of liberation under former Chief of Army Staff Major General Shafiullah.

Ruhul Amin joined the then Pakistan Navy as a sailor in 1951. Subsequently, he served in a number of naval ships of Pakistan Navy.

In 1968, he was posted to BNS Bakhtiar in Chittagong and was serving there till the start of the liberation war.

Bangladesh Navy was raised on 28 September 1971 with two vessels Padma and Polash. Ruhul Amin, being a sailor, joined in the Navy and was posted to Polash.

On 10 December 1971, a convoy of INS Punuil, BNS Polash and BNS Padma sailed for Mongla from Heron Point. The mission was to capture PNS Titumir at Mongla Port. At 12 noon, when the convoy reached near Khulna, four aircrafts flew over the convoy. After a few minutes, those aircrafts first bombed Padma and then Polash. The ships were on fire. The crews requested Rulul Amin to leave the ship but he did not. Even he defied the order of his officer in-charge Lieutenant Commander Roy. To him it was more than his life. He could probably be able to extinguish the fire if not suddenly a shell of the ship exploded and took away his life.

Local people buried him at Baghmara village under Rupsha PS in Khulna.

Bir Sreshtha Ruhul Amin was born on 1 February 1934 at Baghpachra village in Sonaimuri upazila (then Begumganj Thana) under Noakhali district.
