Heroic Jamalpur FFs hoist flag of freedom on this day
2014-12-10T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/heroic-jamalpur-ffs-hoist-flag-of-freedom-on-this-day-54537

Jamalpur district was freed from the Pakistani occupation forces on this  day in 1971 by the freedom fighters jointly with the Indian soldiers.

National flag was hoisted on Primary Training Institute (PTI) premises, the then headquarters of 31 Baluch Regiment of the occupation forces at 6.30 am, reports our correspondent.

Earlier, 31 Baluch Regiment Commander Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Mahmud along with 810 Pak Armies surrendered to freedom fighters and allied forces.

During the Liberation War, indiscriminate killings, looting and rapes took place everyday in the district. The occupation army and their cohorts set ablaze villages, rendering thousands of people shelterless.

On 17 July, 1971, the battle with Pakistan Army at Parpara village in Sharishabari upazila was significant in the history of Liberation War. On this day, villagers of Parpara, equipped with locally made arms, confronted with the Pakistan forces.

In a face to face fighting, over a dozen of people of the village embraced martyrdom. Following the strong resistance, the Pakistani Army retreated but set the village ablaze.

On September 25, 1971, in a sudden attack, Pakistani Army killed 52 people of Phooldaherpara village under Sharishabari upazila.

The fights at Kamalpur, bordering area and strategic front-line, under Bakshiganj upazila, was another mark in the history of the Liberation War.

Freedom fighters attacked Kamalpur Camp first on June 12 again on July 31 and finally on October 21 causing colossal losses to both the sides.

Colonel Abu Taher, Commander of Sector-11 had launched violent attacks on the camp on November. But the Sector Commander was seriously wounded in the bloody battle.

After 21 days of confinement, on December 4, Pakistan soldiers gave up the battle and retreated to their headquarters at PTI.

Sundarganj upazila

Away in Gaibandha, Sundarganj upazila was freed from the clutches of occupation forces on this day in 1971.

Heroic sons of the soil defeated Pakistani troops in fierce gun battle. The brave freedom fighters later hoisted the flag of Independent Bangladesh at Sunderganj headquarters.

In the first week of December, freedom fighters, led by company commander Shah Newaz, fought against the occupation forces at Patgram, Nageshwari and Bhurungamari. The freedom fighters ousted the Pak forces and freed the areas, reports our correspondent.

While entering the upazila, the freedom fighters encountered the occupation forces. At least 24 embraced martyrdom in a severe gunfight at Bhurungamari in Kurigram district.
