Several more areas were liberated on this day
2014-12-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/several-more-areas-were-liberated-on-this-day-54978

Several more areas of the country were freed from the clutches of Pakistan occupation forces on this day in 1971.

Gobindaganj upazila of Gaibandha was freed after killing of about 200 Pakistan army personnel in a heavy fight with freedom fighters and allied forces, reports our correspondent.

During the period of liberation war, the occupational forces set up a permanent camp at Hawyakhana near Katakhali bridge on Bogra-Rangpur highway for easy movement of army convoy. Scores of men and women were tortured and later killed at the camp.

Occupation forces set up two other 'concentration camps' at Mohimaganj sugar mill's rest house and Mohimaganj Alia Madrasa, where they created torture cells. Everyday Razaker and Al-Badr members used to bring suspected freedom fighters and women to the camp.

On August 3, Pakistan army men caught three eminent persons of Mohimaganj-- Abdul Kader Sarker, Abdus Sobhan Akanda and Emaduddin Akanda -- and took them to local army camp. At dead of night, they dragged them to Malancha point on Gobindaganj- Mohimaganj road, shot them dead and buried them.

On December 11, freedom fighters and allied forces attacked Gobindaganj in three groups in the early morning in which about 200 Pakistani forces were killed at Katakhali while the remaining forces fled to Bogra cantonment.

On December 12, freedom fighters and people of all walks of life assembled on Gobindaganj High School ground and hoisted the flag of independent Bangladesh.

Narsingdi district also had the taste of freedom on this day, reports our correspondent.

Although the freedom fighters laid down their lives to free their area from the Pakistan forces, the mass graves are still lying uncared for due to sheer neglect of the authorities.

A foundation stone built at a mass grave at Panchdona tells the tale of the situation as it is being used as a truck stand now.

Similar scenes can be viewed at the mass graves at Panchdona Bridge, Shilmandi Masumpur Beel, Khatohara Bridge, Ghashirdia in Shibpur, or the graves near Brahmaputra and Arial Kha rivers.

People of Hakimpur upazila of Dinajpur celebrated their 43rd freedom day yesterday holding a colourful procession, holding discussion and placing wreaths on the newly constructed memorial.

Hakimpur upazila is now widely known as Hili, reports our correspondent.

Marking the day, Muktijoddha Sangsad of the upazila also organised a rally joined several hundred freedom fighters and local people.
