Utter disrespect to two martyrs of Bogra
2014-12-12T00:00:00+06:00 | Mamun-ur-Rashid, Bogra
https://www.thedailystar.net/utter-disrespect-to-two-martyrs-of-bogra-54980

The term shaheed (martyr) was dropped from the names of an auditorium and a school in the town a few years ago, as if the then authorities wanted to to obliterate the memories of two local martyred freedom fighters.

Shaheed Titu Milanayaton (auditorium) in Bogra was named after martyred freedom fighter TM Ayub Titu, but the authorities changed the long-established name during the last tenure of BNP-led four-party alliance government.

Son of late Asmat Zaman of Malotinagar in the town, Titu was president of Bogra district unit (School Branch) of East Pakistan Students' Union.

"Changing the name is an example of utter disrespect to those who sacrificed their lives for the country's independence," said Shaheed Titu's elder brother TM Musa Pesta, a freedom fighter and vice-president of the district unit of Awami League.

Locals said, they placed demand to the municipality mayor for revival of the former name of the auditorium on several occasions but to no effect.

After the crackdown by the Pakistan army on March 25 night, Titu, a student of Class X of Bogra Zila School, joined the resistance against the enemy at Borogola of the town but he was killed by a bullet.

Contacted, Bogra municipality Mayor Mahbubur Rahman, also adviser of Bogra district unit of BNP, said, "The word 'shaheed' will be inscibed on the nameplate of the auditorium very soon."

Shaheed Azad Pauro Primary School at Jaleswaritola in the town was named after Anwarul Haque Azad, a resident of Malotinagar in Bogra town, who embraced martyrdom in a fight with Pakistani army in 1971.

But the school was renamed Bogra Pre-Cadet High School after the political changeover following the killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on August 15, 1975.

Locals have demanded revival  of the name of Shaheed Azad with the school.

On March 26 in 1971, Azad, along with other local youths joined the resistance to the Pakistani occupation force in the town and killed in a firing by the troopsz.

This correspondent could not contact school managing committee Chairman Tajul Islam as his cell phone remained switched off.
