Three-day programmes chalked for remembering martyred intellectuals
2014-12-14T00:00:23+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/three-day-programmes-chalked-for-remembering-martyred-intellectuals-55230

The nation with a grieving heart observes today Martyred Intellectuals Day commemorating those whom the Pakistani occupation forces and their local collaborators brutally killed just before the dawn of the country's independence in 1971.

On this day in 1971, barely two days before the nation's final victory in a nine-month bloody war for liberation, the Pakistani forces along with their local collaborators styled Al-Badr, Al-Shams and Rajakars sensing an imminent defeat resorted to exterminating the brightest luminaries of the emerging country's intellectual firmament.

The perpetrators picked up the top Bangalee intellectuals including university teachers, litterateurs, doctors, engineers and journalists one by one from their houses, blindfolded and killed them before dumping the bodies at the Rayerbazar killing ground in Dhaka.

The heinous killing was carried out as part of a well-planned strategy to bankrupt the newborn nation of its brain and souls and foil its progress just on the eve of freedom.

Various organisations and institutions including Dhaka University (DU), Sector Commanders Forum and Sammilito Sangskrtik Jote have chalked out programmes like placing wreaths in Rayerbazar's Martyred Intellectuals Memorial, hoisting black flags and holding discussions to commemorate the day.

Twelve DU-based cultural, professional and social organisations begins a three-day programme on the campus today in observance of Martyred Intellectuals Day and the December 16 Victory Day.

The series of programmes will commence through forming a human chain at the base of Aparajeya Bangla at 4:00pm, demanding trial of the perpetrators who ruthlessly executed the brightest sons of the country, including teachers, students and staff of DU.

Simultaneously Bangla Academy will organise a discussion at its premises.

It will be followed by a two-day photo exhibition, campaign to clean litter, roadside shows and lighting of candles.

Tomorrow, a wartime photo exhibition, tree plantation, debate session and cultural programmes are scheduled to take place. The Victory Day celebrations include a bicycle rally, film exhibition and procession.

Slogan 71, Dhaka University Photographic Society, Dhaka University Journalists Association, Dhaka University Debating Society and Dhaka University Tourist Society are among the organisers.
