President, PM pay tributes to martyred intellectuals
2014-12-14T10:29:37+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/president-pm-pay-tributes-to-martyred-intellectuals-55265

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid rich tributes to the martyred intellectuals by placing wreaths at the Martyred Intellectuals’ Mausoleum at Mirpur in Dhaka this morning.

The president placed the wreaths at first around 8:00am and the prime minister followed him to show their heartfelt homage to the great heroes, who sacrificed their lives for the cause of the country and the nation.

Both the president and the prime minister stood in solemn silence there for some time as the bugle played the last post.

The president and the prime minister talked to the war- wounded freedom fighters there and enquired about their wellbeing.

Earlier, on his arrival at the mausoleum site, the President was received by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.

Later, flanked by the senior AL leaders, Hasina placed another wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals’ Mausoleum as the AL chief.

On this day in 1971, the illustrious sons of the soil were brutally killed at the fag end of the Liberation War.

With defeat looming large, the Pakistani occupation army aided by their local collaborators-- Razakar, Al-Badr and Al- Shams -- abducted frontline intellectuals and professionals on December 14, 1971 and killed them to cripple the nation intellectually.

The killers dragged renowned academics, teachers, litterateurs, doctors, engineers, journalists and other eminent personalities blind-folded out of their houses and killed them before dumping the bodies in Rayerbazar, Mirpur and other killing fields.

Their bodies were later dumped at Rayerbazar, Mirpur and some other killing fields in the capital.

The cold-blooded mass murders were carried out under a carefully thought-out plan to cripple the emerging Bangladesh intellectually, as the Pakistani occupation army and their local collaborators sensed an imminent defeat.

To commemorate the December 14 tragedy, different socio-cultural and political organisations have chalked out elaborate programmes, including seminars, discussions and wreath-placing at Mirpur martyred intellectuals’ graveyard and intellectuals’ memorial at Rayerbazar.

The intellectuals were taken to torture cells blindfolded in Mirpur, Mohammadpur, Nakhalpara, Rajarbagh and other locations in the city and later executed en masse at different killing grounds, most notably Rayerbazar and Mirpur.

Since then, the day is being observed as the Martyred Intellectuals Day.
