February 6, 1971
2014-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/february-6-1971-55338

Executive Committee of East Pakistan National Awami Party at an expanded meeting calls to make future governance policy with right for separation of 5-language nations of Pakistan, guarantee of absolute acceptance of autonomy and equal rights to all nations. The meeting also demands release of detained leaders Moni Singh, Ajay Roy, Deben Sikdar, Pir Habibur Rahman and other political leaders and workers.

Secretaries of East Pakistan Student Union in a statement condemn the destruction of the Indian aircraft hijacked at Lahore airport. In the statement they say conspiracy to obstruct the progress of democratic struggle inside Pakistan by creating new crisis in Indo-Pak relationship will no be tolerated.

Pakistan People’s Party Chief Zulfikar Ali Bhutto meets president Yahya Khan as preparation to sit with Awami League chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman for the second time. He apprises the president of the summery of his discussion with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman regarding the 6-point demand in Dhaka and effort to learn the opinion of the people of West Pakistan on this.

A radio broadcast says no Pakistani ships will be allowed to anchor in Indian seaports. Even foreign ships from Karachi seaport will be barred to enter Indian seaports. This ban will be effective immediately.

Some thousand Indian students attack Pakistan Embassy in New Delhi. Over two hundred students and police get injured in student-police fight. Police try to disperse the students using gunfire and tear-gas canisters.

Ghulam Azam, ameer of East Pakistan Jamaat-e-Islami, condemns Indian government for what he says is India showed unjustified and stern attitude over the aircraft hijack incident. He urges the government to stay alert so that there cannot be any obstruction in formulating the governance policy and people’s government.

President Yahya Khan at a lunch party in honour of Mauritius prime minister says Pakistan is ready to assist Mauritius in technical and other sectors.
