February 15, 1971
2014-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/february-15-1971-55348

Pakistan ambassador to United Nation Aga Shahi urges Security Council president with a letter to look into the grave situation that developed between Pakistan and India over the ban on Pakistani aircraft in Indian skies following the Indian aircraft hijack and aggressive speeches and statements by Indian prime minister and government.

First meeting of Nikhil Pakistan Awami League and East Pakistan Awami League executive committee discuss the constitutional issue and reiterate party’s role in making the governance policy based on 6-point demand programme.

In an exclusive interview, oppressed Baluchistan leader Nawab Akbar Khan says although a political party alone can make a governance policy, but it does not have the strength to safeguard the governance policy from the attack of vested interested groups on its own. He says AL chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman is committed to give autonomy based on 6-point and 11-point to East Pakistan and other provincials.

Dr Kazi Motahar Hussain at a discussion says there is no significant development in Bangla language and culture as Bangalis have been deprived from practicing their language, literature and culture freely even 23 long years after independence. Bangla Chhatra League organised the discussion commemorating the Omor Ekushey at Ramna Udyan.

In a joint statement, East Pakistan National Awami League chief Professor Mozaffar Ahmed and General Secretary Syed Altaf Hussain call to observe Omor Ekushey February Martyrs Day with due dignity. In the statement they say Language Movement is the expression of aspiration of the people of East Bangla for national growth. For this, the day is important to such great extent to realise democracy and national interest.

A joint session will be held comprising members of Awami League Parliamentary Party in National and Provincial Assemblies at Engineers’ Institute in Dhaka. AL chief Sheikh Mujibur Rahman will give an important speech at the meeting of working committee regarding 6-point and 11-point, making governance policy based on party manifesto, country’s political and ingravescent economic condition and the situation created following the Indian aircraft hijack.
