February 24, 1971
2014-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/february-24-1971-55358

East Pakistan Governor Vice Admiral SM Ahsan meets President Yahya Khan at presidential palace in Islamabad and apprises him of current political situation of East Pakistan. Ending up a conference with provincial governors and martial law administrators, at Chaklala airport, he tells journalists that law and order situation in East Pakistan is satisfactory and all necessary measures are being taken to maintain law and order.

Jamaat-e-Islami Ameer Maulana Syed Abul A’la Maududi in Lahore says, Jamaat has not changed its stance on 6-point issue. Jammat did not support the 6-point from the very beginning. He makes the comments during an interview with a local weekly paper.

Concerned quarter believes that if steps are not taken immediately to fill the vacuum created by abolishing the central cabinet, economic crisis of East Pakistan will amplify. Government brings radical changes to approval system of different development projects that it took last year to speed up the economic progress of East Pakistan. To give planning, approval and implementation power to provincial authority, the Provincial Development Board was expanded and reshuffled with secretary of central government leading the board. (Staff Correspondent, Daily Pakistan)

President Yahya Khan will appoint few advisors for him to fill up the vacuum created for abolishing the cabinet. The advisors will include some former ministers and retired officers.

At a press briefing at Awami League office, Awami League chief Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman calls oppressed people of Pakistan and farmers, labourers, students and mass to be prepared to resist the conspirators. He says to make confusion among the oppressed people of Bangladesh and West Pakistan, 6-point is being explained in distorted manner. He says 6-point is for saving Bangladesh from colonial state. Mainly, vested quarter from other part of country smuggled resources and ran colonial abuse on 7 crore people of Bangladesh.

At least 6 national assembly members of Pakistan People’s Party book seats in PIA to come to Dhaka on March 2. The members are – Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi, Pir Ghulam Rasul, Makhdum Mohammad Zaman, Makhdum Mohammad Amin, Malik Mozaffar Khan and Hakim Ali Zardari. PIA keeps the issue under strict confidentiality.

President Yahya Khan will visit Dhaka on March 1, before the National Assembly session and meet Awami League Chief Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Both leaders will discuss on bilateral issues and about implementation of constitution.

East Pakistan National Awami Party Chief Professor Mozaffar Ahmed and general secretary Syed Altaf Hussain in a joint statement demand holding of national assembly session on the fixed date, making democratic governance policy and approval and power transfer to people’s representatives. They direct all the units of the party to forge movement against anti-democracy forces with public support through rally, meeting and demonstrations.
