February 28, 1971
2014-12-14T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/february-28-1971-55361

At the inaugural ceremony of Political Science Society of Punjab University, Pakistan People’s Party Chairman Zulifkar Ali Bhutto says dangerous situation will emerge if political standoff happens within the national assembly. Situation will worsen because of the condition that governance policy must be made within 120 days.

A draft governance policy is proposed for consideration at an Awami League Parliamentary Party meeting. After approval of parliamentary party, the draft governance policy will be proposed in the upcoming National Assembly session from the party. A 30-member committee is formed to review the 188-clause draft governance policy following a 4-hour long meeting with Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in the chair.

MNAs from all the parties, except Bhutto’s People’s Party and Qayuum League, decide to join the National Assembly session in Dhaka on March 3. Council Muslim League and Jamiyate Ulema decide to join the session shifting from their earlier decision.

Khan A Sabur, secretary general of Qayuum League, urges Bhutto to accept the verdict of seven crore people of East Pakistan and help Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to make 2-state/2-centre based governance policy so that people can use sovereignty to their own lands. Khan A Sabur says Pakistan is a single nation with two regions. Accepting this reality can solve the current political standoff.

Ghaus Bux Bizenjo, general secretary of West Pakistan National Awami Party and National Assembly member and NAP leader Dr Abdul Hai, member of National Assembly elected from Baluchistan, arrive in Dhaka. At a rally in New Market they say the National Assembly session on March 3 will be held for certain. Respecting the struggle of East Pakistan’s people Bizenjo supports the justified demands for autonomy of Bangla and says people of Baluch and Pakhtun have been suffering the same oppression for demanding autonomy and ethnic rights.

President Yahya Khan holds a meeting with cabinet. Members present in the capital attend the meeting.  The attendees include Chief Staff Office to President Lt Gen Pirzada, Economic Advisor to President MM Ahmed, Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission MH Sufi.

Professor Mozaffar Ahmed, chief of East Pakistan National Awami Party, in a statement says Bhuttos remarks on not joining the upcoming national assembly made adverse doubt on people’s mind. Bhutto earlier said they would not join the national assembly on March 3 if his conditions were not met. NAP leader alleges that conspiracy is going to impede possibility of democracy, various national rights and the rights of farmer-labour majority people. He calls to pass a bill that gives right to separate and ensure autonomy to all races in the first session of the national assembly. He believes in giving the right to every race the work for governance policy will be proper. Because various race and party will come to talk without any hesitation.
