Day of his martyrdom passes off silently
2014-12-15T00:00:00+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Pabna
https://www.thedailystar.net/day-of-his-martyrdom-passes-off-silently-55396

Martyred intellectual Dr Fazle Rabbi got hardly any remembrance in his home district Pabna on the Martyred Intellectuals Day yesterday.

“It is shame for all of us that we could not arrange a single programme in memory of Dr Fazle Rabbi on the Martyred Intellectuals Day,” said Abdul Matin Khan, principal of Shahid Sadhan Sangeet College, also one of the members of Dr Fazle Rabbi Smrity Parishad.

The committee was formed in 2007 to preserve the memory of Dr Rabbi in Pabna.

“The activities of the committee stopped after the death of its founder president Prof Moshiur Rahman in 2012, as I got busy with my personal works during the last few years. We will take step to arrange programmes from next year," said Md Abul Fattah, secretary of the committee.

“It seems we are forgetting Dr Rabbi who made supreme sacrifice for the country. The young generation of the district are mostly unaware of Dr Rabbi," said veteran journalist Ronesh Maitra, also a key organiser of freedom fighters.

The local collaborators of the Pakistan occupation force killed Dr Fazle Rabbi during the last days of the Liberation War in 1971.

Born on September 21 in 1932 at Chhatiani village in Pabna Sadar upazila, Dr Rabbi passed all the examinations from the SSC with distinction. He completed the MBBS from Dhaka Medical College in 1955 and was awarded gold medal for his brilliant results. He became an assistant registrar of the institution.

In 1960, Dr Rabbi went to England for higher education and achieved the MRCP in 1962. He served two hospitals there.

In 1963, he returned to his motherland and joined Dhaka Medical College as an associate professor.

He supported the freedom fighters during the Liberation War.

“To keep the memory of Dr Fazle Rabbi alive in his home district we urged the government to name Pabna Medical College after him. We submitted the proposal to the ministry of health with the signature of a large number of people but to no effect,” said Fazle Shahran Bipu, one of the family members of the martyred intellectual.
