Historic 7th March today
2015-03-07T05:18:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/news/historic-7th-march-today-5567

Today is the historic March 7. On this day in 1971, Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in his fiery speech called on the freedom-loving Bangalees to wage a decisive struggle against the Pakistan junta.

The speech had set the tone for the Liberation War that would officially begin on March 26.

"Ebarer sangram amader muktir sangram, ebarer sangram swadhinatar sangram (This struggle is for our emancipation, this struggle is for independence)," Bangabandhu declared in a thunderous voice at a mammoth rally at the Racecourse Maidan (now Suhrawardy Udyan) that day.

The vigorous speech inspired people of all walks of life to prepare for the war that the Pakistani regime would launch on the unarmed Bangalees 18 days later, committing one of the worst genocides in history for the next nine months.

Shortly before his arrest on the black night of March 25, Bangabandhu declared the Liberation War.

Bangabandhu's March 7 speech has been selected as one of the most rousing and inspirational wartime speeches in the last 2,500 years. The dynamic speech had changed the course of the country's history.

To mark the day, different political parties, socio-cultural organisations and student and professional bodies have chalked out various programmes, including laying wreaths at the portrait of Bangabandhu and holding discussions and rallies.

The ruling Awami League will hoist national and party flags atop the Bangabandhu Bhaban and party offices and place wreaths at Sheikh Mujib's portrait on Bangabandhu Bhaban premises in the capital's Dhanmondi in the morning.

The party will hold a rally at Suhrawardy Udyan at 3:00pm where Awami League President and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina will speak as chief guest.

President Abdul Hamid in his message for the day said the March 7 speech would remain in the history of the Bangalee nation for ever.

Pointing to Bangabandhu's long-cherished dream to turn the country into "Sonar Bangla", he called for continued efforts to remove poverty, hunger and illiteracy from the society.

In her message, Hasina, Bangabandhu's eldest daughter, said the March 7 speech is one of the best political speeches ever in the world history.

"Let's get united again to turn Bangladesh into a golden Bangla that Bangabandhu dreamt to build, by implementing Vision-2021 and Vision-2041," she said.
