Road pillar with martyr's name disappears, nobody concerned
2014-12-18T00:00:58+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Nilphamari
https://www.thedailystar.net/road-pillar-with-martyrs-name-disappears-nobody-concerned-55862

A concrete pillar on a road inscribed with the name of Shaheed (martyr) Capt Bashar, stretching from Bata intersection in Sabuj para area to primary teachers training institute (PTI) at Ukil Para in the town disappeared over a year ago, but the authorities here turned a blind eye to the matter despite repeated pleas. Shaheed Capt Bashar Road was named after Captain RAM Khairul Bashar, ASC of Bangladesh Army, who sacrificed his life for the country's independence in 1971. It is a matter of shame that the authorities are yet to take any steps in this regard, said locals and family members of the martyred war hero. Meanwhile, Shaheed Captain Bashar Gate, which was built by Nilphamari Zila Parishad at the main entrance to Nilphamari town over a decade ago, is also lying uncared for due to unknown reasons. Pasting of posters on its wall by individuals and various local organizations has tarnished the image and look of the gate. Even the name of the martyr, inscribed artistically on two points of the gate, can now hardly be seen due to the posters. Despite repeated pleas, the municipality and district authorities are yet to take any steps to preserve and renovate the memorials, alleged Shafiqul Islam, younger brother of the martyr. Abdul Gaffar, district organiser of Muktijuddho Smrity Sangrakkhan Kendra, said it is our misfortune that even after 43 years of independence we cannot show proper respect to the martyred freedom fighters. Contacted, Mayor Dewan Kamal Ahmed said the municipality would take up a project soon to reconstruct all the freedom fighters' memorials. Captain Bashar was killed on May 29, 1971 during the Liberation War. A road has been named after him in Dhaka Cantonment while the main entrance to Jahanabad Cantonment in Khulna also bears the memory of the valiant freedom fighter.
