A vote for war crimes trial
2014-01-06T00:00:11+06:00 | Hasan Jahid Tusher and Gazi Towhid Ahmed
https://www.thedailystar.net/a-vote-for-war-crimes-trial-5664

An elderly freedom fighter, Abdus Samad Bir Pratik, travelled more than 12 thousand kilometres from New York only to exercise his right to vote at yesterday's national election. His aim was simple: to express his support for the war crimes trials initiated by the Awami League government. Aged around 65 years, Samad, who is partially paralyzed and unable to move of his free will, arrived in Dhaka a day before the election despite requests and entreaties from his well-wishers in the United States not to travel to Bangladesh at this time. “My main purpose in coming here and casting my vote in the elections is to demonstrate hatred for the Jamaat-e-Islami and extend my support for the trial of the war criminals,” he said while talking to The Daily Star at the city's Uttara Girls School and College, where AL nominated Shahara Khatun won the battle of the ballot. “I have fought in the War of Liberation and taken part in bringing freedom to the country. I have my right to vote,” he said when asked to explain the reason why he had come to vote at a time when some major political parties, including the main opposition BNP, were boycotting the polls. Samad came to the polling center at 2:00pm with his wife, who is also a voter at the school under Dhaka-18 constituency. Expressing his support for the war crimes trials, the freedom fighter said the government was doing fine in running the country. It was not only Abdus Samad but a few other elderly people as well who said they had voted in the polls only to extend their support for the war crimes trials. “I am voting neither for Sheikh Hasina nor Shahara Khatun. I'm just voting for the trial of the war criminals,” said Shakhawat Hossain, aged around 60 years. Sarafat Ahmed, a retired government official, who came to the polling centre with the help of his son since he has difficulty walking on his own, said, “I have come here to show my hatred for the Jamaat and to say 'no' to those political parties which take the side of the war criminals.” Another elderly man, preferring not to be named, said he had voted to prevent the rise of the Jamaat and to see the trial of war criminals reach a satisfactory conclusion.
