School students played glorious role in Language Movement
2016-02-19T00:00:00+06:00 | EAM Asaduzzaman
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/school-students-played-glorious-role-language-movement-574438

A large number of boys and girls of two high schools, inspired by their headmasters, joined the 1952 Language Movement in the then sub-divisional town, recalls advocate Mahbubur Rahman Dulu, lone surviving Language Movement veteran in the area.

Demanding official declaration of Bangla as a state language, the then Muslim Chhatra League called strike in all educational institutions of East Pakistan on February 4 in 1952.

But local Urdu speaking students and pro-Muslim League student activists with the support of local Pakistani administration flexed muscle to foil the movement, said Dulu, now bed ridden due to old age complications.

As a tense situation was created in Nilphamari High English School, the then headmaster Asiruddin Ahmed, also father of martyred freedom fighter of 1971 Capt Khairul Bashar, called all the students at the school ground.

In response to his question who wanted to join the language movement, most of the students raised hands in support while a handful of Biharis and pro-Muslim League students differed.

Encouraged by the headmaster, the students burst into slogans and brought out a procession, said Dulu.

School students Shafiar Rahman, Shamsul Islam, Mahbubur Rahman Dulu Shawkat Ali, Hemonto Roy then played forefront role.

The agitation gained a new dimension as many students from Nilphamari Girls' High School, joined them in procession, said the language veteran Dulu.

Fouja Begum, Jakia Sultana, Chhomela, Feroja, Halima, Rabeya, Saleha, Sufia, and Bulu were among the organisers of the movement.

It was possible despite the conservative environment of the time as Abu Nazem Mohammad Ali, headmaster of the girls' high school, inspired the language movement in Nilphamari.

Abu Nazem, also father of present cultural affairs Minister Asaduzzaman Noor, held a secret meeting with his fellow comrades to chalk out programmes for the movement, said Dulu.

Furious at the success of February 4 programme, the then Urdu speaking sub divisional officer Monwar Hossain verbally abused the two headmasters for 'provoking' their students.

In protest, students and teachers in the town called strike on February 8, 9 and 10, recalled Language Movement veteran Dulu.

After the martyrdom of Rafiq, Salam, Barkat, Jabbar and Shafiq in police firing during the Language Movement in Dhaka on February 21, Khairat Hossain, provincial assembly member elected from Nilphamari, walked out of the assembly along with Moulana Abdur Rashid Tarkobagish.

Police arrested Khairat Hossain the next day.

Local Awami Muslim League convener Dabiruddin Ahmed and headmaster Abu Nazem Mohammad Ali were arrested on February 26, and secretary of local unit of Muslim Chhatra League Shafiar Rahman and Jubo League convenor Shamsul Haque the following day.

They were released after spending long time in prison.
