President, PM pay homage to language heroes
2016-02-21T00:20:47+06:00 | BSS, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/president-pm-pay-homage-language-heroes-575560

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid their deep homage to the martyrs of the historic Language Movement by placing wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar here at one minute past midnight tonight on the occasion of Amar Ekushey and the International Mother Language Day.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina arrived at the Shaheed Minar seven minutes before the clock struck 12 midnight. President Abdul Hamid reached the Central Shaheed Minar just before the zero hour.

President Abdul Hamid and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina proceeded to the altar of the Central Shaheed Minar together in slow pace as the immortal song on Amar Ekushey--"Amar Bhaiyer Rakte Rangano Ekushey February"-- was playing.

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and senior Awami League leaders pay homage to the martyrs of the historic Language Movement by placing wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar in Dhaka early Sunday. Photo TV grab

The president was the first to lay the wreath at the Central Shaheed Minar. Just after the president, the prime minister placed the wreath at the Shaheed Minar. They stood in solemn silence for some time as a mark of profound respect to the memories of the language heroes.

Ministers, advisers to the prime minister, parliament members, chiefs of three services, diplomats, senior Awami League leaders, high civil and military officials were present on the occasion.

Three Chiefs of Armed forces pay their homage. Photo: TV grab

Later, Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad Dr Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury, Deputy Speaker Fazley Rabbi Mia and Leader of the Opposition Begum Raushan Ershad placed wreaths at the Central Shaheed Minar.

On arrival at the Shaheed Minar, the president was received by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and Vice Chancellor of Dhaka University Professor Dr AAMS Arefin Siddique.

With Bangladesh, 194 counties across the globe are observing the day as the Unesco, on November 17, 1999, declared February 21 as the International Mother Language Day. Photo TV grab

Flanked by cabinet members and senior leaders of the party, Sheikh Hasina, also the President of Bangladesh Awami League, later placed another wreath at the Shaheed Minar on behalf of the party.
