Competition on Liberation War history concludes in CTG
2015-01-18T00:00:00+06:00 | Arun Bikash Dey, Chittagong
https://www.thedailystar.net/competition-on-liberation-war-history-concludes-in-ctg-60382

When visually impaired Al Amin, a student of Government School for the Blind, Chittagong, concluded his performance with a patriotic song, the audience broke into loud applause. The well appreciated song was one of the highlights of the concluding ceremony of a two-day competition on Liberation War history at Jela Shilpakala Academy in Chittagong city on Friday evening.

The competition organised by Research Centre for Bangladesh Freedom Struggle and Liberation War Trust Chittagong aimed to spread knowledge about the Liberation War particularly among the younger generation.

Artist Mustafa Monwar was chief guest at  the concluding ceremony. Our independence was a great achievement, he said, going on to add that his countrymen did not hesitate from sacrificing their lives for the country's freedom. He recalled that the Pakistani flag was not hoisted anywhere in pre-independent Bangladesh on March  23, 1971,  that was Pakistan Day.

“I was then a programme manager on television and we also did not hoist the Pakistani flag that day,” he said.

Monwar advised the students to learn about the history of the Liberation War and extend their gratitude to the martyrs and freedom fighters everyday for their struggle and sacrifice to achieve the independence of the country.

He then taught the school students the basics of painting, “The first and foremost rule of drawing pictures that there is no rule of drawing pictures,” he said.

Somnath Haldar, Assistant High Commissioner of India in Chittagong, who was a special guest, urged the students to learn the authentic history of their own country.

He said a record of some programmes of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra would be handed to the Research Centre for Bangladesh Freedom Struggle and Liberation War Trust Chittagong.

Dr. Mahfuzur Rahman, president of the trust, presided over the programme. He urged the students to read books on the history of the Liberation War.

Mustafa Monwar distributed prizes among the winners of different competitions on the history of Liberation War of Bangladesh.
