Yusuf ordered detention of man killed in 1971
2014-01-10T00:00:10+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/yusuf-ordered-detention-of-man-killed-in-1971-6225

A prosecution witness yesterday testified that a man was killed after Razakars took him to the bank of a nearby river at Rayenda Bazar in Sharonkhola upazila of Bagerhat during the Liberation War at the instruction of Jamaat-e-Islami leader AKM Yusuf. Abdul Latif Hawladar, 19th prosecution witness in the case against Yusuf, said Abdus Salam Khan was killed on July 29, 1971 after Razakars picked him up and took him to Yusuf, who was holding a meeting with other Razakars at Rayenda Bazar at that time. On November 20, Abdur Rouf Mallik, a freedom fighter from Sharankhola and ninth prosecution witness in the case, testified that Salam Khan was an informer of freedom fighters and Razakars killed him near the Baleshwar river following Yusuf's order on July 29, 1971. During his nine-minute testimony, 72-year-old Latif from Rayenda Bazar said he had gone to his maternal grandfather's home, which was near Sharonkhola Police Station, on July 27, 1971 and heard that Yusuf came there to hold a meeting for “maintaining law and order". “I heard, AKM Yusuf was holding a meeting with Razakars on the first floor of a building [in Sharonkhola], and at that time, I saw some Razakars bringing one Abdus Salam Khan there,” said Latif. “I hid myself beside a road after seeing this. At that time, following the instruction of AKM Yusuf, Razakars took Abdus Salam on the river bank. Then I heard some gunshots,” he said, adding that later he learned that Salam had been killed.

Latif identified Yusuf at the dock yesterday. The three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan adjourned the proceedings until Sunday when Latif will face cross-examination. Yusuf, historically known as the founder of the Razakar force, is facing 13 charges relating to crimes against humanity and genocide in greater Khulna region in 1971. Meanwhile, the tribunal adjourned the case proceeding of war crimes accused Syed Mohammad Qaisar till January 13 following the prayer of both prosecution and defence lawyers.
