Zeenat brings Independence Day special collection
2015-03-17T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/check-it-out/zeenat-brings-independence-day-special-collection-71933

The luxurious fashion house, Zeenat, brings you a special wardrobe for Independence Day. For an exquisite collection of red and green to go with the occasion, Zeenat has an exclusive set of attires. The collection features patriotic colours, such as dark red as appears on the flag. The line features saris, panjabis and more, all in Zeenat's original designs. The unique design and superior quality makes Zeenat a wise choice for this occasion. Zeenat provides free alter solutions; there is always room for customisation. Location: House # 54 (Apartment1/B), Road # 11, Block F, Banani, Dhaka. Contact number: 01818 818515. Facebook page: Zeenat Boutique.

Lotto ready for summer

The Italian lifestyle brand, Lotto, has brought in their summer products. The wardrobe consists of T-shirts, trousers, jeans and gabardine pants, caps, shoes, slippers, etc.  They are comfortable to wear and very stylish indeed. You can find all these products at the outlets of Lotto. To know more, find Lotto Bangladesh on Facebook.

Kay Kraft's wardrobe for Independence Day

Since the beginning of March, the Kay Kraft outlets have been busy with their Independence Day wardrobe collection.. The shelves feature saris, shalwar kameez suits, fatuas, panjabis, scarves, tops, etc. There is a children's collection too. Red and green have been the predominant choice of colours and cotton is mainly the fabric that has been used. For more information, visit www.kaykraft.com or www.facebook.com/kaykraft.com.bd.

Kobe offering lunch and dinner buffets

Kobe, the Japanese grill restaurant, is offering lunch and dinner buffet packages. The lunch buffet starts from Tk 499 (with 5 percent service charge). This lunch buffet package features rice, fried rice, special salads, bread and delicious desserts and ice creams. The buffet also features Kobe original Gyudon, a Japanese stewed beef dish served with steamed rice. Dinner buffet starts at Tk 680 (with 5% service charge). Kobe also has a kid's menu priced at Tk 299. The children's menu is served on interesting plates designed after Japanese cartoons such as Doraemon, Anpanman, etc. Kobe also offers take away menu (bento box) starting from only Tk. 500. Location: House 25 (4th floor), Road 11, Block H, Banani, Dhaka. For inquiries, call 01791406080 or check the Facebook page: www.facebook.com/Koberestaurantdhaka.
