'Enemy morale is deteriorating very fast'
2015-03-24T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/op-ed/enemy-morale-deteriorating-very-fast-73337

Major Khaled Musharrof, psc. HQ No. 2 Sector Bangladesh Forces No. BD/0022/G August 1971

Colonel M A G Osmani, awc., psc. Commander-in-Chief Bangladesh Forces

Dear Chief

Since our last meeting, the over all situation in my sector and around has had few significant developments which I understand should be brought to your kind notice. I may take the opportunity to put on record the effect of the brave activities by the boys of Bangladesh Liberation Forces in my Sector.

a. The communication line, both rail and road running from Comilla to Chittagong (upto Feni) had been totally disrupted, the communication between Dacca and Chittagong is being harassed and disrupted as we find necessary and according to our convenience.

b. Activities has been stretched much inside Bangladesh all along the Sector. It is reported that the Pak regime has started a general evacuation from Comilla to Chandina.

c. Bases much inside the district zones of the sector has been set up and new bases are in the process of being exploited and formed continuously.

d. Power carrying pylons and transformers in different Sub stations in Dacca have been destroyed in such an extent as to reduce the power supply by 75%. The need for power in Dacca is very less because of the closure of Mills and little population that are there, effect is not yet fully apparent and felt.

e. Enemy morale is deteriorating very fast.

f. Re-organization of the 'Mukti Bahini' has been carried out to meet the present and future demand of our war efforts, specialists are being trained by our own effort in the Sector in co-ordination with the supporting army.

g. Boys have been trained to take over the charge of the 3.7 inch mountain guns and 10 August has been fixed as the inauguration date. I have named it as 'Mujib Battery', being the first Artillery Battery in the Bangladesh Army. I have provided already two Officers and the battery will be fully operational on the 10th August 71 manned by our crews and Officers.

It may be seen that no stone is left unturned as to bring my Sector 100 percent efficiency so that the war effort according to the plan can be carried out keeping the high tradition set by their past performance.

I may take this opportunity to point out that as the activities in the Sector to the south of mine (Chittagong) is plagued by insensitivity and bad handling of the war effort in the past, the burden on my Sector has been too much. Unless this Sector is activated the situation may go to the advantage of the enemy and we may find it hard to keep the balance.

It has been reported that in that Sector (Chittagong) besides general inefficiency in the past, corruption by the troops and illtreatment towards local tribal population had also been rampant. All these has brought an effect on the general morale of the 'Mukti Bahini' and the local population. In this general mess, the extremists have also dug in their position. Unless it is checked right now the situation may prove very difficult in future. Internal dissentions has also crept in because of the bad handling in the past.

Captain Rafique who is a very sincere and brave Officer is finding it hard to tackle. Some time in the past you wanted to know whether it would be possible on my part to take over Chittagong as well. As I had been busy in getting my Sector on the grip, I reluctantly declined in that circumstances. Now I may very humbly put forward to your gracious self that Chittagong may also be brought within my zone for operation (…) to sort the things out. It will also enable to chalk out a comprehensive plan or effective interdiction of enemy from Chittagong to Comilla.

Due to the famine condition and inflation of money prevailing in Bangladesh, guerilla warfare operation inside Bangladesh is very expensive. Unless operation money is given regularly and as per your policy, it will be quite difficult to conduct the aforesaid operations effectively. I may here mention that the supporting agency over here, has not got any specific instruction.

The supply of arms still remains inadequate. The scale of arms to be provided to guerillas as laid down by you is not adhered to by the supporting agency. As a result, guerillas are still being armed with only two sten per 10. I am afraid to say that it is frightfully inadequate for the boys to start the effective operation inside. It is suggested that the supporting agencies must be persuaded to implement your policy of scale of arms laid down for the guerilla.

I was also shown a organization prepared by the supporting agency where only 37 IMGs are authorized to a battalion whereas the organisation prepared by you authorises 72 INGs. I have already pointed out to them, but it seems that matter has been decided by the higher authorities of supporting units as such you may please take up at your end.

The families of 'Mukti Bahini' and the 'Freedom Fighters' those who have attained Shahadat or have been incapacitated due to enemy action are facing untold miseries as the Government of the Peoples' Republic of Bangladesh has not yet granted any gratuity etc to them. To boost up the morale of the liberation army and at the same time to save the unfortunate families from total ruination, I think some monetary assistance must be given to the bereaved families immediately. It is also suggested that some fund may please be placed at the disposal of Sector Commander, so that adhoc relief can be given till the case is decided on merit.

The Police personnels who crossed over to India are not properly utilized and the SP appointed by the Peoples' Republic of Bangladesh seems to be quite inactive and indifferent about the fruitful use of the Police. May I have the honour to suggest that these Police forces, with proper co-ordination/consultation with the Government of India may be posted in different entry points in the border belt to check the suspected persons coming in/going out of India in collaboration with the Sector Commandoes and Indian Police.

I have received a posting order issued from Bangladesh Forces vide 1121/A or 31 July 71 asking me to provide 4 Officers from my Sector. You are well aware that following Officers were posted out/being posted out of my Sector recently:-

a.         Major Shafaat Jamil                          -     3 E Bengal

b.         Major Mohd Amin                           -     8 E Bengal

c.         Capt Amin Ahmed Chowdhury         -     Mymensingh Sector

d.         Capt Mahboobur Rahman Chy  -     1 E Bengal

e.         Capt Shahid Ullah Bhuiyan        -     HQ Bangladesh Forces

f.          Capt Akbar Hussain                     -     3 North Bengal

g.         Capt Mujibur Rahman                -    Being posted to Brigade HQ which is ordered vide BDF No. 1121/A of 31 July 71.

h.         Cap Abdus Salek Chowdhury, as per your instruction is being posted out as Sect Commander

Moreover, I have raised the first Artillery Battery (The Mujib Battery) out of my own resources and provided both men and two Officers out of this Sector. As a result, I am left with bare min Officers without which there will be total dis-orgnazation in the Sector specially when I am operating in four vital districts and main Line of Communication. You would be kind to appreciate that if any more Officers are posted out of my humble compliments, I would be constrained to say that this Sector would bound to be ineffective which is of no ones desire. It may be also recalled that you have promised during my last visit that no more Officer will be posted out from my Sector.

In your last DO, you mentioned that boys operating in Dacca are not really effective. Now after hearing the BBC and other foreign radios about our activities in and around Dacca, you must be convinced that we are not only producing bang but we are really effective. Any way, open fighting in the heart of Dacca by our boys deserves appreciation from your side which definitely will boost up the morale.

Our boys have been also closing in with enemy and fighting hand to hand battles in different encounter and producing wonderful result which also calls for your appreciation. Recently some of the actions were under taken to clear enemy positions and to test the battle worthless of regular boys who have proved real "Tigers" by fighting over the dead bodies of the enemy and flushing out the barbarous enemy from the bunkers.

Different agencies/organisations are sending boys inside Bangladesh without any co-ordination/consultation which have already created lot of confusion and misunderstanding and has given chance to the enemy to run wedge between us. It is requested that launching of troops inside Bangladesh must be done after co-ordination with the Sector Commanders to avert any mishap.

I am confident that you would give your personal attention to the problems that I have posed in my DO at your convenience to enhance the war efforts and redress my difficulties.

Eagerly looking forward to see you amongst us soon. May God walk with you. "Joy Bangla".

With kindest regards.

Yours Major Khaled Musharrof

Source: Muktijuddhe 2 Number Sector ebong K Force written by Khaled Musharrof  published by Prothoma Prokashon in 2013.
