Razakars killed 65 on a single day
2014-01-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/razakars-killed-65-on-a-single-day-7531

A freedom fighter yesterday testified that Razakar force formed by Jamaat-e-Islami leader AKM Yusuf had killed 60-65 people, mostly Hindus, at Ranjitpur village in Bagerhat upazila on May 13, 1971. Dilip Das from Ranjitpur told the International Crimes Tribunal-2 that the marauding armed men also torched their houses and chanted slogans "Pakistan Zindabad, Yusuf Bhai Zindabad" while leaving the village. Two of his relatives were killed in the attack, Dilip, the 21st witness in the case against Yusuf, said. The two-member tribunal led by Justice Md Mozibur Rahman Miah with Justice Md Shahinur Islam recorded Dilip's testimony before adjourning the case proceeding until today, when he will face cross-examination. Tribunal Chairman Justice Obaidul Hassan was not present at the court yesterday. During his 25-minute testimony, the 65-year-old Dilip said after the historic 7th March Speech of Bangabandhu and proclamation of independence on March 26, they [villagers] had formed Sangram Committee to guard their village. "One day, we heard that Razakar force under the leadership of Yusuf Shaheb from Khulna will attack our village. He formed the force in Bagerhat with Razzab Ali Fakir, Siraj Master, Hafizuddin, Ishaq and many others," he said. "At that time, the looting began in Hindu dominated areas in Bagerhat and some people were also killed there," Dilip said. On the May 13 morning, Razakars attempted to attack Ranjitpur but had retreated as the villagers were ready with sticks and locally made weapons to resist them. But Razakars attacked the village around 2:30pm, when some villagers went home to have lunch. "When some of us were on guard, Yusuf Shaheb's force comprising Razzab Ali Fakir, Siraj Master, Hafizuddin, Ishaq entered our village crossing the nearby river and opened fire (on the villagers)," Dilip said, adding that sensing a sure defeat, they took shelter inside bushes. "The armed men torched our houses and shot dead people who were trying to flee," the freedom fighter said. When attackers left the place, they came out of hiding and found the bodies of 60 to 65 people, mostly Hindus. "Among the deceased, 24-25 people were from our village. My cousin Gobinda Das and brother-in-law Sanatan Das were also killed," said Dilip. After the incident, Dilip along with his family left for India on the night of May 13. He took arms training there and later participated in the Liberation War. Earlier in the day, Azab Uddin Mia, an assistant librarian of Bangla Academy library, testified as the 20th prosecution witness in the case. Azab, as a seizure list witness, exhibited some copies of newspapers of 1971, which were collected by the investigation officer of the case from the library. Yusuf's counsel Mizanul Islam completed Azab's cross-examination asking only one question. Yusuf, a nayeb-e-ameer of Jamaat-e-Islami, is facing 13 charges for his alleged involvement in crimes against humanity and genocide committed in greater Khulna district in 1971.
