NUB pays respect to Freedom Fighters
2015-04-09T00:00:00+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/shout/bulletin-board/nub-pays-respect-freedom-fighters-76058

Northern University Bangladesh's Business Faculty Cultural Club conferred honours upon AKM Mozammel Haq, MP, Minister, Ministry of Liberation War and Ferdousy Priyabhashini, eminent sculptor. The programme was chaired by Dr. Abu Yousuf Md. Abdullah, Chairman, Northern University Bangladesh Trust. In his speech, the chairman thanked the government for recognising the contribution being made by the Biranganas and urged everyone to come forward, strengthen and enrich the history of the Liberation War. Among others present at the programme were Muhammad Musa Sadik, former Secretary and Chief Advisor, NUB; Prof. Dr. Anwarul Karim, Pro Vice Chancellor, NUB; Anwar Hossain, Treasurer, NUB, and Lt. Col (Retd.)  Aqtedar Ahmed Siddiqui, Registrar, NUB. Students, teachers, officials and employees were also present at the event, which ended with a cultural programme.

Best Performance Award Ceremony at WUB

The event "Best Performance Award Ceremony" was held on April 3, 2015 at the auditorium of the main campus of WUB. On this day a total of 184 students received certificates for their outstanding performance in the last semester final examination. Vice Chancellor Professor Dr. Abdul Mannan Choudhury graced the occasion as chief guest while Professor Dr. M Nurul Islam, Pro Vice Chancellor; Morsheda Choudhury, Treasurer; Dr. Musfiq Mannan Choudhury, Secretary, BOT, WUB, were present as special guests. Professor AKM Ziaul Islam, Controller of Examinations, chaired the session.

EWU Library arrange digital library training courses

Ten-day training courses were organised by the EWU Library in two phases, from February 11-24 and March 23-April 6, 2015 at East West University campus. Dr. Mohammed Farashuddin, Chairperson, BOT, EWU and former Governor, Bangladesh Bank graced the closing ceremony as the chief guest. Dr. M Aslam Alam, Secretary, Bank and Financial Institutions Division, Ministry of Finance, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh was present as special guest. Professor Ahmed Shafee, VC, EWU, chaired the programme. The programme was coordinated by Dr. Dilara Begum, Librarian, EWU and General Secretary Digital Library Network of South Asia (DLNetSA).

Muthography exhibition by UIUPC

"Muthography Chapter – 1" organised by the United International University Photography Club was held on April 5, 2015. The event was inaugurated by Prof. Dr. M Rezwan Khan, VC, UIU, Prof. Dr. Chowdhury Mofizur Rahman, Pro VC, UIU and Sumon Ahmed, Director of Student Affairs at the UIU Campus-1 and continued till April 8. In the exhibition, 50 photographs from 25 photographers were selected by renowned judges. The 2nd phase of exhibition will be held from April 19 - 22 every day from 10am to 4 pm at the UIU Campus-2.

Certificate Awarding Ceremony at GUB

Green University of Bangladesh (GUB) arranged a Certificate Awarding Ceremony at GUB Auditorium to recognise the outstanding academic performances of the students placed in Vice Chancellor's and Dean's list of honour in Fall Semester 2014.  VC of GUB Professor Dr. Md. Golam Samdani Fakir presided over the programme. In a particular semester, students earning a GPA of 3.90-4.00 are placed in the VC's list, where as those attaining a GPA of 3.80 -3.89 is placed in the Dean's list.  A total of 129 students from eight departments of GUB received certificates. Among them, 71 were awarded Vice Chancellor's certificate and 58 were awarded Dean's certificate. Registrar Lt. Col. Md. Ali Ambial Haque Khan (Retd.), Controller of Examinations Prof. SMK Nazmul Haque, chairpersons of different departments and faculty members were present at the occasion

CED of BRACU holds Stakeholder Workshop

The Centre for Entrepreneurship Development (CED) of BRAC University organised a "Stakeholder Workshop" on a research project titled "Participatory Factory Mapping Research (PFMR)" on March 23, 2015 at BRAC Centre Auditorium. The research project is funded by the C&A Foundation. The project is being conducted by the BRAC University's Centre for Entrepreneurship Development (CED) and Centre for Climate Change and Environmental Research (C3ER), and coordinated by BRAC USA. The workshop was moderated by the former Vice Chancellor and Professor Emeritus Ainun Nishat of BRAC University. The keynote presentation on the research project was provided by Mohammad Rezaur Razzak, Associate Professor and Acting Head, BRAC Business School, and Director, CED, BRAC University. Along with this, Dr. Syed Saad Andaleeb, Vice Chancellor, BRAC University; Prof. Dr. Hafiz G.A. Siddiqi, Professor Emeritus, BRAC University; Dr. Mirza Azizul Islam, Professor, BRAC Business School, and former Advisor, caretaker government of Bangladesh were also present at the workshop.

***
