Razakars yelled 'Yusuf Bhai Zindabad' after killings, torching of houses
2014-01-21T00:01:19+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/razakars-yelled-yusuf-bhai-zindabad-after-killings-torching-of-houses-7707

Another prosecution witness yesterday corroborated the May 13, 1971 murders and arson carried out in Ranjitpur village under Bagerhat sadar upazila by Razakar forces, historically known to have been founded by Jamaat-e-Islami leader AKM Yusuf. The 22nd witness, Jugal Krishna Das of Ranjitpur, who lost his paternal uncle that day, said after killing 50 to 60 people and torching scores of houses, the attackers left chanting “Pakistan Zindabad, Yusuf Bhai Zindabad”. “For the first time, today I revealed Yusuf's name,” said Jugal. When the International Crimes Tribunal (ICT)-2 asked why he had not done so, he replied, “Where should I tell this?” The 21st witness, Dilip Das, also a freedom fighter, gave his deposition on Sunday, stating that 60 to 65 people, mostly Hindus, had been killed and their houses torched by the force Yusuf formed. ICT-2 yesterday recorded Jugal's testimony and both his cross-examination and that of Dilip before adjourning proceedings till today. During the 32-minute testimony, 63-year-old Jugal said they had formed Sangram Committees to guard their village after the historic 7 March speech of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Later, Jugal's uncle, a Khulna resident, informed during separate visits that the Razakar force had first been formed in Khulna and later in Bagerhat under Yusuf's leadership, he said. On the morning of May 13, the villagers resisted an attack by the Razakars. But when some villagers went away for lunch around 3:00pm, some 60 to 70 armed Razakars were able to enter, he said. “We retreated and hid inside bushes...and saw the Razakar force open fire...We heard crying and sounds of gunshots coming from the village...the Razakars carried out the atrocities for around three hours,” he said. Jugal said when the attackers left, he went towards the village's high school field and found eight to 10 bodies. He also heard from people that around 50 to 60 people were killed in the incident, Jugal said. “I found the body of my uncle Sanatan Das beside our old home,” said Jugal while bursting into tears. Bodies of Gobinda Das, Kanai Das, Kanik Das, Kalipada Das, Radhakanta Das and Ganesh Das were also lying at different places, said Jugal, adding that there is a mausoleum in the village in memory of the martyrs. While being cross-examined by Yusuf's counsel, Jugal stated that he had heard about the force's formation some 10 to 12 days after the 7 March speech. Yusuf is facing 13 charges of crimes against humanity and genocide committed in greater Khulna district during the 1971 Liberation War.
