8 Jamalpur 'Al-Badr men' charged
2015-04-20T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/backpage/8-jamalpur-al-badr-men-charged-78220

The prosecution yesterday pressed five charges against eight Jamalpur “Al-Badr men” for their alleged involvement in crimes against humanity committed during the Liberation War.

The charges include murder, abduction and torture.

The crimes were committed in between April 22 and December 11, 1971 in Jamalpur, Prosecutor Tapos Kanti Baul told The Daily Star. The charges were brought for the eights' alleged involvement in nine criminal incidents.

The accused are Ashraf Hossain, 64, Prof Sharif Ahammed, 71, Abdul Mannan, 66, Abdul Bari, 62, Harun, 58, Abul Hashem, 65, Shamsul Haque, 75, and AKM Yusuf Ali, 83. Shamsul and Yusuf are in jail while the rest are absconding.

The International Crimes Tribunal-2 led by Justice Obaidul Hassan fixed tomorrow to decide whether it would accept the charges.

Meanwhile, the tribunal yesterday asked the prosecution to submit formal charges, if there is any, on May 21 against three men who allegedly committed war crimes in Maheshkhali of Cox's Bazar in 1971.

The court came up with the order after Prosecutor Rana Dasgupta submitted a progress report on the matter and sought more time to press formal charges against them.

The suspects are:  Abdur Rashid, Salamat Ullah Khan and Moulavi Zakaria.

Rashid and Salamat were top leaders of Maheshkhali Convention Muslim League while Zakaria was a top leader of Nezam-e-Islami there. They were allegedly involved in different types of crimes in 1971, Rana Dasgupta alleged.

Both Convention Muslim League and Nezam-e-Islami were against the war.

The tribunal yesterday also allowed three defence witnesses to defend war crimes accused Forkan Mallick, an alleged Razakar of Patuakhali, and fixed April 26 to start recording the witness testimony.

ICT-1

The prosecution yesterday completed placing arguments before the ICT-1 on “factual aspects” in the case against fugitive war crimes accused Syed Hasan Ali.

They claimed that they had been able to prove all the six charges against Hasan, who allegedly committed war crimes in Kishoreganj.

The tribunal fixed today to hear the closing arguments from the state-appointed defence counsel.
