Four charges accepted against 3 Habiganj 'Razakars'
2015-06-01T00:00:00+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/city/news/four-charges-accepted-against-3-habiganj-razakars-90643

International Crimes Tribunal-2 yesterday accepted against three Habiganj "Razakars" four charges of crimes including murder, rape and abduction committed in the district during the 1971 Liberation War.

The prosecution on May 17 first pressed the charges against Muhibur Rahman Boromian, former chairman of Baniachang upazila's Khagaura union parishad, and his younger brother Mujibur Rahman Angur Mian, the incumbent chairman.

Police arrested their cousin Abdur Razzak on May 19 following a prosecution petition saying his involvement in war crimes had been found during investigations against the brothers.

The prosecution says the accused were involved in the killing of freedom fighter Rajab Ali, rape of two women, arson and looting of the house of Maj Gen MA Rob, the Liberation War's deputy commander-in-chief, and the abduction, confinement and torture of Anfar Ali.

The three-member tribunal led by Justice Obaidul Hassan with membersJustice Md Mozibur Rahman Miah and Justice Md Shahinur Islam fixed July 22 to hear on the charges.

Meanwhile, the prosecution continued placing closing arguments in the case against Forkan Mallik, an alleged Razakar of Patuakhali's Mirzaganj upazila facing five charges including murders and rapes.

Prosecutor Mukhlesur Rahman Badal completed placing arguments citing prosecution witnesses' testimonies on the first two charges over the killing of three people and forcing three Hindu brothers to convert to Islam.

The tribunal adjourned proceedings until today.

Meanwhile, a fourth prosecution witness linked Obaidul Haque Taher and Ataur Rahman Nani to the abduction and murders of several people in Netrakona's Barhatta upazila during the Liberation War.

Nabi Newaz Talukder of Laufa village, the seventh to testify in the case centring six charges, elaborately described the incident that took place on the first day of the Bangla month of Kartik. The previous three gave similar descriptions.

The three-member International Crimes Tribunal-1 led by Justice M Enayetur Rahim adjourned proceedings until today, when Nabi will be cross-examined by the defence.
