Kishoreganj 'Razakar' verdict tomorrow
2015-06-08T11:27:00+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/country/news/kishoreganj-razakar-verdict-tomorrow-93922

A special tribunal in Dhaka will deliver its verdict tomorrow on fugitive war crimes suspect Syed Md Hasan Ali of Kishoreganj.

The alleged Razakar commander of the district faces six charges including killing, abduction and arson committed the district during the Liberation War in 1971.

The International Crimes Tribunal-1 led by its Chairman Justice M Enayetur Rahim today fixed tomorrow for delivering the verdict.

The 65-year-old accused was once involved with Nezam-e-Islami, an anti-liberation organisation. But he is not active in politics now.

Tribunal-1 on November 11 last year framed the six war crimes charges against him.

On April 20 this year, the tribunal kept the case CAV [Curia Advisari Vult, a Latin legal term meaning verdict could be delivered anytime] after concluding hearing the closing arguments placed by both the prosecution and defence lawyers.

According to the prosecution, Syed Hassan, alleged commander of Tarail unit of Razakar in Kishoreganj, set up a camp of the anti-liberation force at local police station on April 23, 1971.

Syed Hasan who originally hailed from Brahmanbaria had been living in Tarail with his family for many years, including the period of the war.

CHARGES AGAINST HASAN

The ICT-1 charged Syed Hasan for torching and looting of seven houses of one Hasan Ahmed of Sachail village on April 27 in 1971, complicity in killing of one Tofazzal, abduction of two other people and burning of two houses of Konabhawal village on August 23, and involvement in killing of 12 persons and torching of 10 houses in Shimulhati village on September 9 in 1971.

He was also charged for killing of eight people and abduction of 10 others in Borgaon village on September 27, abduction and murder of Kamini Kumar Ghosh and Jibon Chakravarty and looting of Ghosh's house in Araiura village on October 8, and links to the killing of Rashid Ali Bepari and torching of 100 houses in Sachail village on December 11 during war.
