Liberation of the Spirit
2015-06-16T00:00:00+06:00 | Noshin Nawal
https://www.thedailystar.net/lifestyle/event/liberation-the-spirit-96946

The “Shwapno Life 2015 Eid Fashion Fiesta”, a night of dramatic enchantment put together by Ban Thai Spa, showcased a collection of tradition wear for both men and women designed by Shahinur Rahman, Tamanna Sharmin and Tanaz Bunni.

This vibrant show with upbeat music and a fusion of contemporary and ethnic vibes was held at the Bengal Multimedia Studio on 12 June, 2015. The show particularly focused on the upcoming talents in the Bangladeshi fashion industry, limited not only to the clothing but also to the models and choreographers putting together the entire event.

It highlighted the growing manufacturing potential of Bangladesh and its ability to not only produce import quality clothing but also create its own designer niche for it in the local market.

The current collection by Shwapno, the apparel label, was described by Sabbir Naseer Hasan, executive director Ban Thai Spa, as a presentation of symbiosis between the divine and the animal instinct possessed in human beings, it was meant to express poise and soulfulness as well passion that is a part of all people and they wanted to be expressed in the colours and prints of their outfits.

This collection had the appropriate balance of bright summer-spring colours alongside the sophisticated pastels to compliment the heat and humidity. A balance that was well appreciated by the audience present there.

In addition to the appreciation of the variety of clothing choices the designs were also simple enough to be both dressed up and dressed down depending on the occasion.

Specifically for the female apparel line, there were more varieties presented in the form of saris with different designs of blouses mostly full sleeved or three-quarters and also “kurti shirts” with embroidery or stonework.

In comparison the male line consisted mostly of semi-casual and formal panjabis which would be a good buy for Eid. Although for the current style sensibilities of the general public some of the options in the female line may be too extravagant or loud and would not cater to people who like toned down or subtle outfits.

However, more than the clothes in itself the presentation of them and the fashion show itself was the better part of the night. It was good music and the ambience was aptly set and the whole spiritual and mythical vibe of the line was well translated on to the stage. People seemed much engrossed in the little performances weaved in with the models walking the ramp.

Photo courtesy: Ban Thai
