Countrywide 'genocide' on
2013-03-31T00:00:27+06:00 | Rashidul Hasan from Brahmmanbaria
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/countrywide-genocide-on

BNP Chairperson Khaleda Zia yesterday lambasted the government for “continuing genocide countrywide” and called upon the people to get prepared to dislodge it.

“You have noticed that the government committed genocide yesterday [Friday] in Chapainawabganj and Sirajganj. Even women took to the streets [in these areas] with brooms and sticks to resist this,” Khaleda said while addressing a wayside rally at Chinair in Brahammanbaria Sadar upazila.

At least five people were killed in Chapainawabganj and Sirajganj on Friday in clashes between opposition activists and law enforcers over arresting Jamaat men.

The leader of the opposition in parliament said, “Time has come to say goodbye to this government. “Get prepared to oust it. And you [people] will have to make it happen not by your words but by your action.”

Terming the government "shameless", Khaleda said it cannot see or hear anything. Had this government had the minimum of shame, it would have resigned long ago.

Earlier in the morning, the BNP chief left the capital to visit the tornado-hit areas in Brahmmanbaria. She saw for herself  the massive devastation caused by the  March 22 Tornado at Urshiara and Jarulota villages in Sadar upazila and sympathised with the affected people.

She also distributed money, cloths and rice among the tornado-hit.

At the wayside rally later, Khaleda alleged that the government has not stood by the affected people with adequate assistance and relief materials. “They [the government] distributed some relief before the camera only to show the people, instead of giving them [the affected] necessary help to recover from their losses in the tornado.”

The former prime minister urged the government to ensure that the tornado-hit people can rebuild their damaged houses before the rainy season.

She also called upon the well-off section of the society to come forward to assist the affected people and to reconstruct the damaged mosques in the areas.

Assuring the disaster-hit people that her party would continue to stand by them, the BNP chief said, "We were with you in the past, we are with you now and we will also remain with you in the days to come."

Khaleda alleged that this government has destroyed the country by indulging in rampant corruption, loot and theft.

Accusing the government of failing to implement any of its election pledges, the BNP chief said her party wants to save the people form the oppression of this government and ensure their security.
