Nation observes Martyred Intellectuals Day, honours victims of 1971 killings
2025-12-14T09:09:19+06:00 | UNB, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/news/nation-observes-martyred-intellectuals-day-honours-victims-1971-killings

The nation is observing the 'Martyred Intellectuals Day' today to commemorate the intellectuals killed systematically by Pakistan occupation forces and their local collaborators at the end of the 1971 Liberation War.

President Mohammed Shahabuddin paid homage to the martyred intellectuals by laying a wreath at the Martyred Intellectuals Memorial in Mirpur at 7:00am. He stood in silence for a while in remembrance.

Chief Adviser Professor Muhammad Yunus later paid tribute at the memorial and observed a moment of silence.

Following the state leaders, people from all walks of life were allowed to place wreaths at the memorial, honouring the intellectuals who were abducted and murdered during the final days of the war.

On December 14, 1971, renowned academicians, doctors, engineers, journalists, artists, teachers and other eminent citizens were dragged from their homes, blindfolded, taken to unknown locations, and brutally tortured and killed.

Their bodies were later found at killing fields in Rayerbazar, Mirpur and other parts of the capital.

As defeat became imminent, Pakistani forces, aided by local collaborators including Al-Badr, Al-Shams and Razakar, carried out the mass killings in an attempt to eliminate Bangladesh's intelligentsia and cripple the nation intellectually.

Among those martyred were Prof Munier Chowdhury, Dr Alim Chowdhury, Prof Muniruzzaman, Dr Fazle Rabbi, Sirajuddin Hossain, Shahidullah Kaiser, Prof GC Dev, JC Guha Thakurta, Prof Santosh Bhattacharya and Mofazzal Haider Chowdhury. Journalists killed included Khandaker Abu Taleb, Nizamuddin Ahmed, SA Mannan (Ladu Bhai), ANM Golam Mustafa, Syed Nazmul Haq and Selina Parvin.

The interim government has undertaken a series of programmes to mark the day.

Family members of the martyred intellectuals and freedom fighters are paying homage throughout the day at the Mirpur Martyred Intellectuals' Graveyard.

On the eve of the observance, President Shahabuddin and Chief Adviser Yunus issued separate messages, calling on the nation to uphold the ideals for which the intellectuals laid down their lives.

Special doa and munajat are being offered at mosques, temples and churches nationwide.

Bangladesh Television and private channels are airing special programmes, while national dailies have published supplements highlighting the significance of the day.
