No memorial monument at largest massacre ground in Faridpur
2000-01-05T00:00:29+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/no-memorial-monument-at-largest-massacre-ground-in-faridpur

FARIDPUR, Jan 4: The occupation Pakistan army committed the largest massacre in the district at Ishan Gopalpur village under sadar thana on May 22 during the Liberation War in 1971.

The army entered into the district head quarters on April 21. On their way to the town, they brutally killed eight saints praying through kirton the glory of Lord Jagath Bandhu believed by the Hindu community to be God incarnate at Sree Angan gateway to the town.

Thereafter army, with the help of their local collaborators, prepared a blue print to commit genocide in some areas of the district where the town dwellers imbued with the spirit of Liberation War took shelter.

Their first choice fell on Ishan Gopalpur, 10 kilometres off the town where Chittaranjan Ghosh, one of the organisers of the Liberation War and his eldest brother Jagadish Chandra Ghosh, district correspondent of the then The Pakistan Observer, Krishna Roy and Shipra Roy, two sisters and the then students of Dhaka University having political affiliation with Chhatra Union (Matia group) took shelters with their family members along with other freedom loving families of the town at the Ishan Gopalpur Zaminder House. On May 2, Pakistan occupation army along with their collaborators encircled the Zaminder House at noon. They picked up 24 male members hiding in and around the house and shot them to death one after another. However, Jagadish Chandra Ghosh, Chittaranjan Ghosh, Krishna Roy and Shipra Roy escaped the gruesome massacre as they left for India before the fateful day to take part in the Liberation War. All other male members who went into hiding came back to the village before dark when the Pak army had left the village. They, to their profound grief found dead bodies of 24 persons lying in a pool of blood on the premises of the Zaminder House of Ishan Gopalpur named after the benevolent Zaminder Roy Shaheb Ishan Chandra Sarker and the women wailing embracing their near and dear ones.

However, the villagers dug a large hole beside the tank of the Zaminder House and kept all the 24 bodies buried there in without the performance of any ritual ceremony.

The names of those who embraced martyrdom on the day are Ashotosh Sarker, grand son of Zaminder Ishan Sarker, Jagadish Chandra Ghosh's father, a brother and a cousin - Jogesh Chandra Ghosh, Gour Gopal Ghosh, Bablu Chandra Ghosh, Dayal Das, Jadab Biswas, Ashu, Ganguli, Tarapada Ganguli, Monindra Nath Sikder and his son-in-law. Badal Sarker, Haripada Das, Montu Chandra Das, Sontash Das, Bimal Chandra Das, Omesh Sarker, Bishnu Thakur, Kala Chan Bairagi, Bota Saha, Badal Goswami, Mukunta Saha and other two whose names are not known.

The villagers enclosed the area where the dead bodies were buried with bamboo fencing and every year pay their homage to the martyrs of their own way by placing flowers and flower wreaths on May 2. Twenty-nine years have elapsed since this beastly massacre. But no government initiative, whatsoever, has yet been taken to build a memorial to preserve the memory of these martyrs. It is the demand of the local people to build a memorial there in remembrance of them.

Awami League who led the Liberation War are now in power. So, they should take immediate steps to erect a memorial as a mark of respect to those who fell victims to the brutal killings of the Pakistani occupation army during the Liberation War.
