Panchagarh freed this day in '71
2013-11-29T00:12:54+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Thakurgaon
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/panchagarh-freed-this-day-in-71

People of Panchagarh will observe different programmes today, marking liberation of the area from the Pakistan occupation forces in 1971.

On this day in 1971, valiant freedom fighters hoisted the flag of independent Bangladesh in Panchagarh town by defeating the Pakistan occupation forces.

On November 20, the freedom fighters intensified their attack on the Pakistani occupation army from three sides of the then thana headquarters and captured one after another the enemy camps -- Amarkhana on November 20, Jagdalhat on November 25, Shingpara village on November 26, Talma village on November 2, and Panchagarh CO Office, Atwary, and Mirzapur on November 28.

In the face of joint attack by the freedom fighters and allied forces, finally the Pakistani occupation forces retreated from Panchagarh town on November 28 night and took shelter at Saidpur Cantonment.

Freedom fighters entered the town in the morning on November 29.

As the news spread, people from the adjacent villages rushed to the town and rejoiced liberation of the area by chanting 'Joy Bangla' slogan with the freedom fighters.

Shortly after the Pakistani occupation forces started crackdown in capital Dhaka on March 26 in 1971, freedom-loving people of Panchagarh organised different programmes to aid the struggle for independence.

Panchagarh remained free till April 16 when the occupation forces took control of the town and set up several camps in different areas of the then Panchagarh police station under Thakurgaon sub-division.

During the next several months, the Pakistani forces and their collaborators killed a large number of innocent people in the area until its liberation on November 29.

To mark the day, district unit of Muktijoddha Sangsad has taken up different programmes including placing of wreaths at the martyrs' memorial, bringing out colourful procession from Muktijoddha Chattar in the town and holding a discussion and cultural function at their office premises.

Different political parties and social organisations have also taken similar programmes to mark the occasion.
