Dhirendranath Dutta: Our hero, our seer
2013-03-29T00:10:57+06:00 | Syed Badrul Ahsan
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/dhirendranath-dutta-our-hero-our-seer

Dhirendranath Dutta

IN the pantheon of Bengali heroic men, Dhirendranath Dutta occupies a prominent niche. There were in him all those traits which go into the making of a man of strong intellectual and moral character. In him were combined all those elements which went into the shaping of a leader.

Dhirendranath Dutta was truly a leader, one who was brave enough to comprehend realities that would underpin our world of the future. The Language Movement we commemorate annually is but a mark of the presence of Dhirendranath Dutta in our collective life, for it was he who first instilled in us the sentiment of a heritage needed to be reaffirmed in us despite our being part of Pakistan. When on February 25, 1948, he rose to inform the constituent assembly of the new state that the Bengali language had to have a place in the political and constitutional scheme of things, he was only reminding his fellow Bengalis that tradition could not be sacrificed on the sordid altar of communalism.

Not a single Muslim Bengali politician could call forth the courage to support Dutta on that day. Their loyalty to the Muslim League turned out to be deeper than their concern for their language and their culture. In the House on that day, Dutta's demand that the linguistic proceedings of the assembly be widened to encompass the Bengali language, to allow the poverty-driven peasant in Bengal to communicate better with his child pursuing education in urban circumstances, met with derision from Pakistan's prime minister and other West Pakistani politicians. Their parochialism did not allow them to probe the intellectual argument the respected Dutta was making in the assembly.

And yet Dhirendranath Dutta would turn out to be a seer, a trailblazer as it were, in articulating the aspirations of the Bengali segment of Pakistan. February 1952 was to be his vindication. Where in February four years earlier his was a lone voice, four years on it was an entire nation that identified with Dutta's commitment to his ancestral land. Comilla was home for him. That Pakistan could not guarantee him security of life was a probability he never lost sight of. That as a Hindu he was consistently in danger was not an illusion for him. But none of these worries would make him leave East Bengal, as so many others of his community had done. It was the land he worshipped, not the political configuration it became part of in the mad summer of 1947.

Having struggled for an end to British colonial rule, Dutta focused on the need for democracy in the improbable state of Pakistan. As part of the short-lived Jukto Front ministry in 1954, he proved that politics could return to being secular among the Bengalis. The Pakistan state, vulnerable as such states always are and therefore insecure, hounded Dutta to no end. And the chance to do away with the venerable man, that charming personality resting on high politics and deep intellect, came for that state in March 1971.

For the marauding soldiers, it was a time when a nascent Bangladesh had to be crushed, when communalism had to be raised anew. Anything Bengali was a negation of Pakistan. And every Hindu was a traitor to Pakistan. And so it was that the Pakistan occupation army, brutal and medieval and shameless to its fibre and bone, abducted the eighty-five year-old politician and his son Dilip Dutta. They were not to be seen or heard of again.

It is a selfless and humble man, a thinker and scholar, we recall forty two years after the state of Pakistan kidnapped and murdered him. Dhirendranath Dutta remains a Bengali who cared about Bangladesh, about its people. His life was lived on principles resting on courage of conviction. Because he happened to be around, because he helped shape our destiny, we could seize history and turn it into a story to our specifications. Therein is the greatness in Dhirendranath Dutta.

(Dhirendranath Dutta -- politician, scholar, Bengali nationalist -- was abducted by the Pakistan occupation army on March 29, 1971, and murdered around a fortnight later.)

The writer is Executive Editor,

The Daily Star.

E-mail:

[email protected]
