Many aspects of '71 tragedy still haunts conscience of Pakistanis
1998-01-26T00:00:50+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/many-aspects-of-71-tragedy-still-haunts-conscience-of-pakistanis

ISLAMABAD, Jan 25: Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's declaration to punish those responsible for the 1971 fall of Dhaka is seen as a major change in the government's attitude and its readiness to face facts pushed under the carpet for so long, reports IANS.

There are many aspects of the 1971 tragedy which still haunts the collective conscience of Pakistanis, especially those who had a direct contact with Bengalis or were present in East Pakistan at the time before the province's bloody separation.

Most obscure and least probed is the killing of civilians after the break-out of organised violence there in 1971.

Referring to his Dhaka visit last week, the prime minister said he felt sorry that he had to call Bangladesh "only a friendly country" after having been one country for so long.

"The people who conspired to dismember Pakistan are still enjoying the status of respectable citizens of the country. We have four years to go in the office and the elements that had worked against the solidarity and integrity of the country in the past, and who are still making similar efforts, will be brought for trial," the prime minister pledged.

Drawing linkages between the situation in Karachi for the last few years and the scenario in the then East Pakistan, he said, "The mandate of the people was not honoured in 1971. Had power been transferred to the majority party of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the tragic, heart-burning history could have taken a different course".

"The East Pakistan tragedy in 1971 is the least discussed part of the country's history - a blind spot...the causes, the events and the aftermath of the dismemberment of Pakistan have never been allowed to be independently ascertained and disseminated," said Salman Rizvi of a human rights group.

He however finds some basis for hope in the latest pledges made by Sharif, mainly focusing on punishing the culprits whose identification varies depending on which side of the political divide you are.

"The vows of bringing to book those responsible for the secession of East Pakistan may only be political rhetoric to identify himself with the Mohajir community of Karachi. All whom the Pakistan Muslim League of Nawaz Sharif blames for the bifurcation of the country are dead," Rizvi says.

Though the reflections on the part of an elected prime minister may not redress the wounds unhealed by time, it may be an indication that he wants to keep at bay such fateful eventualities in future, says a Muslim Leaguer. But Sharif's opponents in the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) whom the League blames for the country's division term these as a "cheap publicity stunt.""Whom will he punish," asks Riaz Pirzada, a former PPP minister. According to Pirzada, the PML had put blame on Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Indira Gandhi in 1971. "Now he is trying put all on Bhutto just to hit the headlines," says Pirzada.

A few days ago Sharif told MQM workers in Karachi that, like Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's Awami League, the mandate given to them by the people of Karachi has also been violated for the past three years.

According to political observers, Pakistan may not be ready as yet to fully face these and other bitter truths about its past, but the present direction of the political process is qualitatively positive. For example, in his Karachi visit before leaving for Umra, the prime minister was surrounded by sobbing women at the MQM headquarters whose relatives had disappeared during an operation clean-up in Karachi.

He said he was "deeply moved" by the woes of the grieved families. Sharif also pledged to make efforts for the recovery of the men who did not return after disappearing in the operation.

For a change, say analysts, a prime minister is talking straight. What he can actually do to change the complexion of the strife-struck city of Karachi is yet to be seen.
