Bangalee nationalism and liberation struggle in world history
2013-03-26T00:04:06+06:00 | Supad Kumar Ghose
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangalee-nationalism-and-liberation-struggle-in-world-history

BENEDICT Anderson, the author of

Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism

traces the origins of the rise of national consciousness to the modern-industrial age of the Enlightenment in Western Europe. Anderson argues that following the decline of Christendom, economic factor led to the growth of universal, homogenous and "horizontal-secular" notions of national space, territoriality, and citizenship.

To him, capitalism was simply "print-capitalism" since newspapers became a commodity. Anderson sees an essential link between the rise of capitalism and the development of print-as-commodity. According to him, print journalism spread the idea of national consciousness among people; since they would read newspapers in their vernacular and would develop their notions of their nation, culture and people through imaginations.

According to this view, nationalism first developed in Europe and the rest of the world followed European brand of nationalism once they started adopting the European style of print journalism.

However, viewing and interpreting nationalism as an outgrowth of European civilisation is not only a short-sighted and reductionistic approach but also a eurocentric bias since Anderson seeks to privilege the history of Western Europe over the histories of all other regions of the World. If we take a glimpse of the history of Bengal, it becomes vividly clear that Bengal had always experienced its history of political consciousness much before capitalism and print-journalism emerged in Europe.

The great King Shashanka who established an independent kingdom in Gaud and actively participated in the imperial warfare in North India can be regarded as the first ruler who provided historical memory centering around state for people who subsequently formed the Bangalee nation and established a nation-state called The People's Republic of Bangladesh in history.

King Gopal, who was selected as a king by the feudal lords in the context of an anarchical milieu in Bengal in the middle of the 18th century, established the great Pala dynasty; providing 'national memories' for future Bangalee nationalists.

During the time of the Delhi Sultanate, several rulers of Bengal revolted against Delhi. It is true that these rulers were mostly of Turco-Afghan origin but it can also be argued at the same time that Bengal's topography and her distance from Delhi and legendary prosperity led Bengalees to develop political consciousness and resultant independence from the rulers of Delhi from time to time.

This explains why Bengal has been called "a land of rebels" (Bulgakpur).

Anyway, land boundaries of Bengal were fixed during the rule of the Iliyas Shahi dynasty and as a result, she developed her distinct identity in the 15th century. During the 16th century, Bangla literature thrived under the reign of Alauddin Hussain Shah, subsequently paving the way for the growth of Bangalee nationalism based on Bangla language and culture in the 19th and 20th century.

Apparently the Mughal period could be regarded as a bad omen for the rise of Bangalee nationalism. However, several rulers of Bengal revolted against Delhi under the Mughal dynasty which could not conquer the whole of Bengal. During this time of relative independence, the Bangalee ethnic and linguistic identity became more pronounced. Bangalees not only enjoyed their autonomy but also used it to develop their customs and literature. All these were bolstered by the economic prosperity that Bengal had always enjoyed from the antiquity.

It is no doubt that Bangalees were the first to lose independence at the hand of the British East India Company, but it is also true at the same time that the Bangalees were the first people among Indians to fight for their national independence from the British. They were at the forefront of the Indian Independence Movement. It should bear mentioning here that one of the first soldiers to revolt against the British in the First Great War of Independence that took place in 1857 was a Bangalee named Mongol Pandey. Bangalees gave leadership of the Indian National Congress for a long time. They did not lag behind in the leadership of the Muslim League when it was established in Dhaka under the leadership of Sir Nawab Salimullah in 1906.

Subsequently, Bangalees lost their leadership of the Indian Independence Movement and, as a result, United Bengal could not gain independence when the British left India in 1947. West Bengal became part of India and East Bengal became part of Pakistan.

However, economic deprivation and cultural onslaught that Bangalees experienced under the Pakistani rulers raised anew national consciousness among the people of the erstwhile East Pakistan. Pakistani rulers also became afraid of the cultural consciousness of the Bangalees. This explains why they wanted to replace Bangla with Urdu, an alien language.

They thought that once the Bangla language was replaced by Urdu, Bangalees would lose their national consciousness. However, Bangaleess fought back and several students courted martyrdom what came to be known as the

Ekushey February Shaheed Debash

.

Economic deprivation was much more substantial, paving the way for nationalism to develop and subsequent emergence of Bangladesh. Noted Economist Rehman Sobhan rightly observes, "It was the failure of Pakistan to remove the sense of relative deprivation of the people of East Bengal which fuelled the forces of Bengali nationalism which finally led to the emergence of an independent Bangladesh."

The national liberation struggle of Bangladesh is like no other in world history because of the rapidity with which we gained our independence, the genocide that the Pakistani Army perpetrated and finally the unparalleled success that we achieved in 1971.

No doubt, many nations fought for national independence and achieved it in world history but we are the only ones to have fought and achieved it in a bare nine months. We lost three millions people within a short span of only nine months. No other nation lost as many brothers and sisters as we did in such a short span of time in national liberation movement and finally reached the goal of national independence.

The end of World War II ushered in a new era called the neo-colonial world order based on the national independence of the new nation-states in the third world. Many ethnic groups were unhappy within the neo-colonial states since they could not enjoy the fruits of national independence from the new nation-states. In fact, they experienced deprivation of one kind or another, leading them to start national liberation struggles anew against the newly independent nation-states.

Various groups in Pakistan and India fought for independence almost from the time these two states became independent. The same happened in Burma now known as Myanmar where so many groups fought for national liberation.

However, none of them became successful. The Igbos fought for national liberation in Nigeria and sacrificed two million souls in the late 1960s but failed to achieve liberation from Nigeria, a neo-colonial construct.

Likewise, the Kurds fought for national liberation in Iran, Iraq and Turkey but to no purpose.

Here lies the uniqueness of the national liberation struggle of Bangladesh in that we were the only ones who fought valiantly, broke the state of Pakistan, a neo-colonial entity, and became independent. In other words, no other national group could achieve such an unparalleled success which we did during the neo-colonial world order between 1945 and 1991.

The long train of national consciousness that we have always cherished as people, as against the notions of the scholars of Eurocentric history, finally made us successful -- making our national independence a unique one in world history.

The writer teaches at the University of Information Technology and Sciences (UITS), Rajshahi, Campus.
