Woes of a non-Bengali freedom fighter
2013-05-15T01:04:41+06:00 | S Dilip Roy, Lalmonirhat
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/woes-of-a-non-bengali-freedom-fighter

Johir Ahmed Khan Photo: STAR

Johir Khan is well known at Jummapara, Lalmonirhat as the non-bengali freedom fighter. There are not many like him who bravely fought in the 1971 liberation war even being ethnically a Urdu-speaking Bihari. Also physicaly impaired, all the odds didn't stop him to take part in liberation war.

Unfortunately, even after 40 years of independece he is yet to recieve any official recognition from the government for contribuation to this nation.

He lost all his property during the liberation war by his fellow Urdu-speaking Biharis, most of whom actively opposed it. His home was burned down.

Now he is maintaining his livelihood running a makeshift shop at Mogholhat railway gate in Lalmonirhat town. He earns between Tk. 70/100 per day.

He was declared “Kawmik Gaddar”, meaning “enemy of lineage” by his fellow Urdu-speaking Biharis opposing the war.

During the war, the enemy kidnapped him from his residence. After torture, he was freed with the life threating condition that he no longer help Bengali freedom fighters.

“I didn't follow the position taken by my fellow Biharis during the war – I helped Muktibahini and other Bengalis from the clutch of Biharis and invading Pakistani soldiers in Lalmonirhat town” he said.

Later, during the war, Johir Ahmed Khan had to flee from his residence as the enemy attacked his home. He moved to India through Mogholhar border. He hoped to take war training there, but was denied due to his physical impairment – his left leg is impaired.

After a week, he returned back to Bangladesh. But for obvious reasons, not to his home. He went to his maternal uncle Rosul Mahmud's place at khotkhotya village in Rangpur.

From his uncle's place, he again started helping freedom fighters of Rangpur. As he was unable to take up arms, he was instrumental in gathering much needed intelligence. His ethnicity and fluency in Urdu language enabled him to easily gather vital information of the enemy.

Johor Ahmed Khan's father Wasid Ahmed Khan and his grandfather Ture Ahmed Khan came at Lalmonirhat town Bangladesh from Asansol in India during British period for railway job. Many Urdu-speaking Biharis lived there working for the railway. Johir Ahmed Khan was born on 1st January in 1947. His father, Wasid Ahmed Khan and mother Bibi Khtun Khan died after the liberation war.

Johir Ahmed Khan still works for the rights and welfare of the freedom fighters. He joins any gathering demandin trial of war criminals. He even financially helps poor fighters with what little he earns from his makeshift shop.

“I submitted 15 applications to the ministry in the last five years to get recognition as a freedom fighter, but no respond till now.

His wife Johara Khatun said that she, her husband along with one daughter and and three sons always identify themselves as Bengali. They speak Bangla at home and never pose themselves as Urdu-speaking.

Freedom fighter's organizer under sector 6 in Lalmonirhat, Ex-MP Alhaz Abul Hossain said, Johir Ahmed Khan played a very important role during the war. He helped freedom fighters and non-combatant Bengali people in Lalmonirhat town.

District Commander of Lalmonirhat District, Mukti Jodhdha Sangsad Alhaz Usuf Ali said freedom fighter Johir Ahmed Khan's appeal for a freedom-fighter certificate should get prime importance. He claimed that his name will be enlisted in the final list of freedom fighters by June 2013. He added that an inquiry report has been sent to the ministry on the first of December 2012.
