Bogra, Manikganj were freed on this day in '71
2013-12-13T00:14:25+06:00 | Star Country Desk
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bogra-manikganj-were-freed-on-this-day-in-71

Bogra and Manikganj districts were freed from Pakistan occupation forces on this day in 1971.

In Bogra, the district unit of Muktijoddha Sangsad has chalked out various proggrammes, marking the liberation of the district, reports our correspondent.

The programmes include placing wreath on Shaheed Minar, holding colourful rally and cultural activities, said Commander of the unit Aminul Islam Pintu.

On December 28 in 1971, Shariakandi, Sonatola, Gabtoli, Shibganj, Dhunat and Sherpur upazilas were freed following a fierce fighting between the Pakistani army and the freedom fighters.

The valiant FFs entered the town on December 13 and declared it free by hoisting flag of Independent Bangladesh in the area.

Away in Manikganj, the heroic freedom fighters declared the district free from the clutches of occupation forces on December 13 in 1971, reports our correspondent.

People of the district will celebrate the day with great enthusiasm and observe various programmes on the occasion today.

After the declaration of independence, Pakistani army killed many innocent people in the area with the help of local collaborators. Enraged by the incident, the freedom fighters launched a gun attack on the enemy forces, killing 82 at Golaidanga village in Singair upazila on October 28 in 1971.

In the last week of November, the heroic FFs entered different areas of the town and defeated Pakistani troop in a few battles.

On December 13, they declared the area free by hoisting flag of independent Bangladesh atop the Primary Training Institute (PTI) in the town.

Meanwhile, the villagers will observe massacre day at Bahola village in Biral upazila of Dinajpur district today, reports our correspondent

On this day in 1971, the Pakistani troops with the help of local collaborators killed at least 32 people irrespective children and elders of the village.

People of the district have chalked out different programmes, marking the day, said the organisers.
