March 1971 . . . March 2013
2013-04-03T00:12:30+06:00 | Syed Badrul Ahsan
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/march-1971-march-2013

In March 1971, we threaded our way through the winding passages of history. In March 2013, we revisited old history even as we noted some of our leading citizens, in the dark company of medieval ghosts, trying to override the past, in flagrant violation of the ethics of politics.

In March 1971, the Awami League, having obtained popular support through a free exercise of the ballot, engaged itself in a strenuous struggle to have the Pakistan army loosen its hold on power and eventually go home. In March 2013, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party took it upon itself to warn Bengalis that the Bangladesh army would not sit idle and indeed would act when the time came.

Back in March 1971, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his colleagues in the Awami League went for a series of

hartals

in the interest of democracy. Their goal was simple: they were conveying a message to the Yahya Khan military junta that their movement was aimed at the establishment of a legitimate, popularly endorsed government in the country. In March 2013, Begum Khaleda Zia and her party colleagues went crisscrossing the country to let people know that their were geared at a specific goal, which was the overthrow of the legitimate, democratically elected government of Bangladesh.

In March 1971, a focal point of the politics of the Awami League was the inauguration of a secular democratic order based on its Six Point programme in the country. Forty two years later, in March 2013, stalwarts of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party served warning on the country that no assault on the sentiments of the majority Muslim population would be tolerated, that indeed the party was in close embrace with the forces of religious fanaticism.

In March 1971, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party, despite having emerged as the opposition in the new national assembly, refused to accept anything that would deprive it of a share in power. In March 2013, Begum Zia and her friends in the BNP, despite having lost the general elections of December 2008, carefully reinforced the notion in the public mind that they remained unhappy about their defeat and would like to see the back of the party which won the majority of seats in parliament nearly five years ago.

In March 1971, General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan accused Sheikh Mujibur Rahman of treason and vowed that 'this crime will not go unpunished.' In March 2013, Begum Khaleda Zia held Sheikh Hasina guilty of 'genocide' and promised to place her on trial in the interest of the country.

Arriving back in Karachi from Dhaka on a March evening in 1971, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto cheerfully told waiting newsmen, "Thank God, Pakistan has been saved." In March 2013, Khaleda Zia went around telling Bengalis that Bangladesh had to be saved from the ruling Awami League. In both cases, if Bhutto and Zia are to be believed, the culprit was the Awami League.

In March 1971, within days of the crackdown by the Pakistan army on the unarmed people of Bangladesh, the leadership of the Jamaat-e-Islami linked up with General Tikka Khan and assured him of its support in dealing with 'miscreants' and 'misguided elements' and 'Indian agents' and so save Pakistan. In March 2013, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party stood shoulder to shoulder with the Jamaat-e-Islami and publicly denounced the patriotic Bengali youths at Projonmo Chottor as atheists and people gone astray.

In March 1971, Major Ziaur Rahman rose in revolt against the Pakistan army, announced Bangladesh's independence on behalf of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and waged war against the junta during the War of Liberation. Over four decades later, in March 2013, his widow and political heir linked up with the forces of anti-liberation in a patent and embarrassing move to bring down the elected government of a sovereign People's Republic of Bangladesh.

In March 1971, Bhutto and his People's Party demonstrated their discomfort with the majority position of the Awami League in the national assembly. In March 2013, Khaleda Zia and her BNP, in no uncertain terms, made it clear once again that they were finding it hard to tolerate the Awami League in power.

In March 1971, the Pakistan national assembly remained a still-born affair because the PPP refused to attend its opening session. In March 2013, the BNP saw little reason to end its long boycott of parliament and instead turned to the streets to settle political scores.

In March 1971, hartal was a disciplined weapon in the struggle against the Pakistan army; in getting the message across that the Bengali nationalist struggle was based on the peaceful concept of non-violent non-cooperation. In March 2013,

hartals

degenerated into anarchy on the streets, with extremist political elements determined to undermine social order through murder and mayhem.

In March 1971, the people of Bangladesh proudly had the flag of their future country hoisted atop their homes in clear defiance of Pakistani martial arrogance; and at the Shaheed Minar they vowed to attain, preserve and protect their democratic rights through a sustained struggle for pluralist governance. In March 2013, the heirs of ageing anti-liberation forces saw nothing wrong or ethically disturbing in tearing apart the flag of Bangladesh and vandalizing shaheed minars across the country.

We rest our case.

The writer is Executive Editor,

The Daily Star

.

E-mail:

[email protected]
