Pabna killings in '71 by Naxals, not Pak army
2013-10-23T00:46:56+06:00 | Staff Correspondent
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/pabna-killings-in-71-by-naxals-not-pak-army

A defence witness in the war crimes case against Motiur Rahman Nizami yesterday testified that he had never heard of the Jamaat leader's name in Pabna during the Liberation War in 1971.

Shamsul Alam, second defence witness who claimed to have been a freedom fighter from Pabna, Nizami's home district, said he had no idea if Nizami was the president of Islami Chhatra Sangha, the then student wing of Jamaat-e-Islami, in 1971.

According to the prosecution documents, Nizami was the chief of Chhatra Sangha during the war.

In his testimony at the International Crimes Tribunal-1, Alam said members of the Peace Committee and Razakar force were from needy families and were only involved in “stealing chickens and cattle”.

“We didn't have to fight against Razakars,” he claimed.

During his cross-examination, the defence witness, however, admitted that Peace Committee members and Razakars had abetted Pakistani occupational army in committing atrocities.

In his deposition, he described how he along with other freedom fighters had received training and led operations at different parts of Pabna.

At one stage, he claimed around 80-90 percent of martyred freedom fighters were killed not by the Pakistani army or their collaborators but by members of the Naxal movement. His statement created a buzz in the courtroom.

Alam made contradictory statements about the Naxal movement during the cross-examination. He said Naxal was a political party but later commented that he did not know if Naxal was any approved political party.

Prosecutor Mohammad Ali asked him if he had known that Al-Badr and Al-Shams were formed to aid the Pakistani occupation force.

The witness replied, “Maybe Al-Badr and Al-Shams were formed to aid the Pakistani army.”

Alam, who was convener of Pabna Muktijoddha Command, said he was nominated as the convener during the rule of the BNP-led four-party alliance government.

He claimed it was not true that Nizami had made him convener of the command.

Following his cross-examination, the tribunal adjourned the proceedings until today.

Jamaat Ameer Nizami, who is facing 16 charges of war crimes, was produced before the tribunal.

Earlier, the tribunal adjourned the date for further order on the contempt of court proceedings issued upon Khandaker Mahbub Hossain, adviser to the BNP chairperson, until November 20.

The tribunal made the adjournment after allowing a four-week time prayer filed by the defence.

The tribunal on October 6 asked Mahbub to explain by October 21 why contempt proceedings should not be initiated against him for his comments on the war crimes trial.

In the prayer, the defence said Mahbub could not prepare the reply due to personal difficulties.

On October 1, the tribunal awarded death penalty to BNP lawmaker Salauddin Quader Chowdhury for committing crimes against humanity and genocide during the war.

Following the verdict, Mahbub said if voted to power, his party would try those involved in the trial.

YUSUF'S CASE

The authorities of Kashimpur Jail have submitted a report on the health of war crimes accused AKM Yusuf as the International Crimes Tribunal-2 is scheduled to pass an order regarding his bail today.

The jail authorities submitted the report on Monday. The tribunal registrar's office has handed over the report to the tribunal-2, Registrar AKM Nasiruddin Mahmud told The Daily Star yesterday.

Following a bail petition of Yusuf, who is historically known as the founder of infamous Razakar force, the court on October 10 asked the jail authorities to submit his health report by yesterday.

The 87-year-old Jamaat leader is facing 13 charges for his alleged involvement in crimes against humanity and genocide committed during the war.
