Hate Statue: Symbol of Razakars, Al Badar, Al-Shams
2013-03-17T00:00:07+06:00 | Minhaj Uddin
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/hate-statue-symbol-of-razakars-al-badar-al-shams

The famous hate statue at Munsef Bazar point. Photos: Prabir Das

Like most of the youth of Bangladesh, Mohiuddin, a Bachelors student at Chittagong University, hates Razakars, Al-Badrs, Al-Shams and other collaborators of the Pakistani Army who conducted atrocities during the 1971 Liberation War. Whenever he hears the name of the collaborators or comes across their photos, his body trembles with abhorrence and he feels like spitting on them. Recently on his way home to his village Kellyshahar of Patiya, he got the opportunity to express his abhorrence at a stone structure called 'Hate statue'.

The 'Hate statue' was inaugurated officially at Munsef Bazar point under Patiya upazila on December 15, 2012-the day before the Victory Day. As soon as the statue was built local people started throwing shoes, and spitting at the statue, as if they were expressing their hatred to the war crime perpetrators. Professor Harunur Rashid, one of the founders of the statue, also mayor of Patiya Pourashava, says, “As far as I know, it is the first hate statue of its kind in the history of Bangladesh”. Rashid informs that many people were so enthusiastic that they hung shoes around the neck of the statue even before it was inaugurated formally.

Shamshul Haque Chowdhury, MP of Patiya 11 constituency, took the initiative to build the statue. “In order to let the youth and future generations know what the collaborators did during the Liberation War, I felt it is important to build the statue,” says Chowdhury. The face of the statue has been derived from the monstrous rendition of Yahya Khan by Quamrul Hasan titled 'Annihilate these demons', says Subashis Das Rupok, the sculptor who designed and built the statue. Rupok studied Sculpture at the Fine Arts Department at University of Chittagong. “The body was filled with thorns so that it depicts the feeling of hate,” he adds. It took him around three months to build the statue that cost around eight lakh taka. Rupok and his family were also victims of the war as Pakistani Army along with the collaborators, burnt their house at Gobindar Khil village of Patiya.  However, Rupok himself does not remember those days as he was born on 1971, the very year of the war.

Mohammed Rafique, an elderly local, is found spitting intermittently at the statue along with dozens of people. Rafique was a twelve-year-old boy during the Liberation War but he clearly remembers the atrocities done by the collaborators in different places of Patiya upazila. “If the name of martyrs of different mass killings held in Patiya, the name of the collaborators and their misdeeds are not enlisted and displayed with the statue, then the new generation would not know what the collaborators did and why they deserve hatred,” opines Rafique. But the complete list of the collaborators, their misdeeds, martyrs are yet to be collected, displayed and all the mass killing fields are yet to be marked and preserved.

However, a few local people are trying to collect the names and preserve the sights where massacres took place in Patiya. One of them is S M Younus, a local teacher, who was a student of class seven during the Liberation War. After the war when he found that all the evidences of massacre and perpetrations of collaborators are fading away, he decided to collect the names of the martyrs who died in Patiya and took initiatives to preserve the sites where massacres took place.

According to Younus the most brutal massacre took place in Mujaffarabad in Patiya where more than three hundred people were killed and their houses were looted and then burned on May 3, 1971. Besides, on April 16, two fighter planes of Pakistani army bombed at the Thanar Moar area where seven people died. Moreover, on October 26, collaborators shot dead six men at Haidgaon union of Paitya upazila. Then again, on October 23, ten people were killed in Gourangopara of Patiya upazila.

Only one memorial was built in Muzaffarabad, which does not have the list of martyrs. No initiative has been taken to preserve other sites and enlist the names of the martyrs who were killed in the other massacres. Younus demands that all the killing sites should be marked by building memorials with names of martyrs engraved on them. “The statue, he says is a good initiative but incomplete.” He adds, “Everyone will automatically express his/her hate to the statue if he/she knows what the collaborators actually did in 1971 Liberation War.  A museum could be built alongside the statue to keep and display the information of liberation war in Patiya, including the name of martyrs, the killing sites, name of collaborators, their misdeeds etc.”

To mark all sites of massacre, Patiya Upazila Nirbahi officer Rabeya Begum says, “There are many places in Patiya where massacre took place in 1971, but not all of them are marked with memorials as it would take huge amount of money and other facilities.” As for Mohiuddin and thousands others like him, the hate statue is a symbol that represents the Razakars, Al-Badrs, Al Shams and other collaborators of Pakistani Army. The statue will stand as a symbol of people's rejection of war crimes and those who commit it.

The local people show their hatred towards the razakars by spitting, and throwing shoes at the monument. Photo: Prabir Das
