Defend spirit of Liberation War
2013-11-22T00:20:05+06:00 | Unb, Dhaka
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/defend-spirit-of-liberation-war

Expressing her strong commitment to make Bangladesh a peaceful and dignified nation in South Asia, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday urged all to defend the spirit of the Liberation War so that the future generation could feel proud of it and live with dignity.

“We'll have to keep in mind that we've achieved independence through the sacrifices and blood of lakhs of martyrs. So, all of us will have to uphold the spirit of the Liberation War,” she told a reception for the gallantry award recipients in Dhaka Cantonment.

The reception was accorded by the Armed Forces Division (AFD) in Dhaka Cantonment marking Armed Forces Day 2013.

Having gained a hard-fought independence, Bangalees do not bow down, Hasina said. “We want to establish Bangladesh as a developed, prosperous, dignified, and peaceful nation in South Asia so that we can move on in the global arena with our heads high."

The PM cited various steps to protect the freedom fighters and their families against the pangs of poverty. “As long as I live, whether I am in power or in the opposition, I give my word that I'll do whatever possible for the treatment and accommodation of the freedom fighters.

“Our goal is to better their lives. I feel hurt when I see freedom fighters suffering from poverty and engaged in such a work, which is not at all respectable for us.”

Recalling the contributions of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, four national leaders, freedom fighters and others, Hasina said the nation had been enjoying independence for their sacrifices. “Their (martyrs) dignity and honour would always remain above everything else.”

Mentioning the Recover Plan 2010 for Bangladesh Muktijoddha Welfare Trust, she said her government had formulated a guideline to raise at least Tk 135 crore for the trust by 2014.

The PM said the retirement age of the government officials and employees, who were freedom fighter, had been raised to 60 years from 57 apart from reserving 30 percent of posts as quota in government jobs for the children of freedom fighters and martyred freedom fighters alongside keeping five percent of posts as quota for admission to various public educational institutions.

Besides, she mentioned, some two lakh freedom fighters are now receiving monthly allowances of Tk 5,000, while monthly allowance for the families of the Bir Shreshthas has been raised to Tk 14,400 and for some 2,500 families of martyrs to Tk 7,020. Over Tk 61 crore was given as state allowances to some 7,838 wounded freedom fighters in fiscal 2010-11, which was raised by 20 percent the next year, she said.

Hasina also noted that some 676 gallantry award recipients were getting higher amounts of allowance. A project of Tk 228 crore is underway to ensure accommodation facilities for the landless and insolvent freedom fighters, from which some 2,971 freedom fighters will get buildings, she said, adding that a process was going on to harmonise the curriculum of the Armed Forces with the national education policy.

Earlier, the prime minister distributed cheques, mobile phones, and shawls as gifts to some selected gallantry award recipients and their heirs at the function.

State Minister for Liberation War Affairs Capt (retd) AB Tajul Islam and chiefs of the three services were present on the occasion. Principal Staff Officer of the AFD Lt Gen Abu Belal Mohammad Shafiul Haque gave the address of welcome.

Later, the PM inaugurated the newly-constructed building of Kurmitola Golf Club and Swadhinata Tower near Shaheed Bir Shreshtha Jahangir Gate of Dhaka Cantonment.
