Depicting the spirit of women during Liberation War
2013-03-09T00:00:30+06:00 | Pranabesh Chakraborty, Chittagong
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/depicting-the-spirit-of-women-during-liberation-war

A scene from the play. Photo: Star

“Lal Jamin”, a play written by Mannan Heera, depicting the life of a woman during the Liberation War, moved theatre enthusiasts of the Port City last Thursday.

It was the 50th show of the drama by Shunnon, an acclaimed troupe from Dhaka. The play was a part of the opening day's programme at a three-day theatre festival being held at the auditorium of District Shilpakala Academy here.

Marking its 12th anniversary, theatre troupe Uttaradhikar organised the festival, titled 'Uttaradhikar Natyatshab-2013', in association with Indian Assistant High Commission, Chittagong.

Writer Hari Sankar Jaladas inaugurated the festival where Somnath Ghosh, Assistant High Commissioner of India to Chittagong, was present as special guest. Uttaradhikar President, Moshlem Uddin Sikder, presented the welcome address.

“Lal Jamin” was staged after the inaugural ceremony. Directed by Sudip Chakraborty, the play zooms in on a rural adolescent girl, who was brutally tortured by a Pakistani soldier and his collaborators, some Al Badr men. Momena Chowdhury played the protagonist in the monodrama.

Momena's credible performance brilliantly depicted the tragic fate of the women who took part in the war to liberate the country, and their agonies in independent Bangladesh.

The actress said that it was a great opportunity for her to be able to perform in the play at a moment when young Bangladeshis are raising their voices all over the country for justice on behalf of the martyrs and victims of the Liberation War.

Professor Hari Sankar Jaladas said that the drama reminded him of real women who had survived atrocities of the war.

Atiquel Islam Joy, Atikur Rahman, Nila Saha and Mirza Shakhechhep Shakib designed the lights, while Wahida Mallick Jolly designed costumes. Julfikar Chanchal and Ramij Raju directed the music of the play where songs of Radha Raman, Mukunda Das and “Mymensingh Geetika” were used.
