The Mujibnagar ethos
2013-04-17T00:00:39+06:00 | Syed Badrul Ahsan
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/the-mujibnagar-ethos

They were young men, dedicated to the cause of freedom, intensely. When you think back on Syed Nazrul Islam, Tajuddin Ahmed and A.H.M. Quamruzzaman, you cannot but be struck by the youth in them. M.Mansur Ali was slightly older. Professor Yusuf Ali was young. Barrister Amirul Islam was younger. M.A.G. Osmany was of course a veteran in terms of age and service in the army, but all those sector commanders were young people, in their thirties. And all these people, fired by patriotic zeal, were there to wage war against the military might of an organised state. They were all patriotic Bengalis responding to the call of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. And Bangabandhu, if you remember, was a mere fifty one years old. That was youth.

In April 1971, then, the revolution that would come to be known as Bangladesh was planned, organised and led to a natural culmination by young men and women awakened to the need to reassert heritage. There were the government officers in the police and in the administration, all young Bengalis convinced that the land had to be purged of the enemy and his cloying collaborators. They made their way to Mujibnagar, to identify with the national cause. In their wake, thousands of even younger Bengalis turned their backs on home, on family, in the towns and in the villages, and marched into battle. Many of them would not return home, would mingle with the dust and mud of the land. Many others would.

And then, in light of history happening on April 17, 1971, would come droves of artistes, journalists, doctors and academics to enlist their names to the cause. Mujibnagar would be a symbol, of everything ennobling, everything inspiring, about politics. For the first time in history, a republic formed by Bengalis and a government constituted of Bengalis were what happened in Mujibnagar.

If April 17 was the beginning of a sustained, disciplined march to liberty, the preparation for it had been made on April 10 and then on April 12. Or even earlier. Tajuddin Ahmed, having informed the world that Bangladesh was on its way, needed, in association with his peers in the party, to have that message of freedom go out to the world louder and clearer and without ambiguity. The world was there on April 17, at Baidyanathtola, an isolated spot of earth destined to be known as Mujibnagar. It heard the message. It felt the rumblings of a new order easing from the core of Bengal's earth.

Patriotism in its fullness defined this nation in April 1971, days before the provisional government gave shape to itself. Driven by conscience and love of country, two young Bengali diplomats in the service of Pakistan, laid themselves open and vulnerable to uncertainty on April 6 at Pakistan's diplomatic mission in India. K.M. Shehabuddin and Amjadul Haq walked away from their jobs, informed the media of the pain of seeing their land going up in smoke at the hands of the state they had served all these years, of their moral requirement to sever all links with the aggressor state.

Shehabuddin and Haq, like everyone else drawn to the battle for Bangladesh, were heroic men in that year of endless misery and, in the end, infinite glory. There were others, Hossain Ali for instance. A day after the rise of Mujibnagar, he pulled down the Pakistan flag from Islamabad's deputy high commission in Calcutta, replaced it with the Bangladesh green-and-crimson and gave the War of Liberation yet another shot in the arm.

Beauty and reality flowed from Mujibnagar. It was a crucial test, the very first, for men of poetry determined to transform themselves into soldiers for freedom. Poetry and politics thus were entwined in beauteous manner; and seventy five million people came together in a historic demonstration of defiance of the arrogance of hollow men and their vacuous state.

Other people in other countries spoke up for Bangladesh. George Harrison and Ravi Shankar and Joan Baez rent the skies of New York with songs of passion, lyrics that brought Bangladesh to every home in the civilised part of the globe. Songs were what the artistes of Shwadhin Bangla Betar sprinkled on the battlefields of Bangladesh, on the rain-drenched camps of the ten million refugees across the border with India.

The war claimed lives in surefire fashion. As the Pakistan army went after unarmed, innocent civilians in the villages and towns, the guerrillas of the Mukti Bahini drove increasing fear into the heart of the enemy. The enemy feared the Muktis; Pakistan's marauding soldiers panicked as their territory shrank in slow, steady degrees.

Mujibnagar brought all Bengalis together. Outside the occupied land of Bangladesh, Bengalis across the diaspora banded together to aid the cause back home. These Bengalis, with roots in Bangladesh or West Bengal, linked hands and hearts and souls in a forceful demonstration of common ethnicity. There were Pakistanis, Malik Ghulam Jilani and Ahmed Salim for instance, who identified with the Bengali cause. Another Pakistani, in the diplomatic service of his country and shamed by the murder and mayhem caused by his nation's army, placed his services before the Mujibnagar government. Iqbal Athar would in time gain Bangladesh citizenship and serve his new country abroad with distinction.

On April 17, 1971, hope sprouted from a huge pile of despair, Joi Bangla discovered a new sense of purpose. In the name of an incarcerated Sheikh Mujibur Rahman -- Bangabandhu, Father of the Nation, Liberator, universally acknowledged leader of seventy five million Bengalis -- the war was taken to the fortress of the enemy. The citadels of the oppressors would crumble eight months later, on a winter afternoon.

It was spring back then. It is spring today.

The writer is Executive Editor,

The Daily Star

.

E-mail:

[email protected]
