Tribute to a Liberation War hero
2013-08-05T00:00:18+06:00 | A.t.m. Abdul Wahab
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/tribute-to-a-liberation-war-hero

General Muhammad Mustafizur Rahman. PHOTO: mes.org

GENERAL Muhammad Mustafizur Rahman BB, ndc, psc, is one of the most decorated officers of Bangladesh Army. He was awarded gallantry award for his bravery in the Liberation War. He graduated from National Defence College, Delhi, India, passed Staff College from Mirpur, Dhaka and Chartered Engineering from UK. Bangladesh Army achieved maximum development during his tenure as Chief of Army Staff.

General Mustafiz was born on January 20, 1941, in an illustrious Muslim family of Rangpur. Mustafiz was only four years old when his father, a deputy superintendent of police, expired. The family settled in Rangpur town where they had their ancestral property.

Mustafiz was a brilliant student. He passed Matriculation examination from Rangpur Zilla School in first division, securing fourth position in science group in 1956. He passed I.Sc and B.Sc examinations, both in first division, in 1958 and 1960 respectively, from Carmichael College, securing eleventh position in I.Sc. He passed B.Sc in Civil Engineering from Buet securing first division in 1965. He was commissioned in Pakistan Army in 1966. He secured excellent grades in all the army courses.

In 1971 I met him in Dhaka Cantonment when he visited my battalion Headquarters. He was a Flight Lieutenant holding the post of Assistant Garrison Engineer (AGE), Pakistan Air Force, Kurmitola, Dhaka cantonment for construction of an international airport.

I was posted from Dhaka Cantonment to Jessore Cantonment in March 1971. When the Pakistan army launched operation "Searchlight" I was joined by Captain Mustafiz and Captain Salauddin at a river-road cross junction between Magura-Jhenidah where we were waiting to ambush the Pakistan army. I accompanied them to India via Jhenidah-Chaudanga-Meherpur.

When Mukti Bahini was organised in sectors and companies, Captain Mustafiz was posted as Company Commander of 'B' Company at Banpur opposite to Darsana. He organised a number of operations in Darsana, Jibannagore and Jhenidah, including mine warfare. He destroyed many trains and tracks and virtually cut off the communication in Chuadanga-Darsana area. Captain Mustafiz planned and led an attack on enemy position on Jibannagore on the night of November 12/13, 1971. He was seriously injured in that operation.

The enemy position was captured. Captain Mustafiz was carried by his troops on their shoulders up to Mukti Bahini base camp, and from there to an Indian hospital. He was operated upon and the bullet was removed. Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad visited him in the hospital. He recovered quickly and took over as sub-sector commander and assisted in establishing and maintaining law and order in Faridpur.

After liberation of Bangladesh he was posted as Brigade Major of 55 Infantry Brigade. When Bangabandhu was killed in 1975 he was in UK attending professional course on Chartered Engineering in a military college. On his return to Bangladesh he was commander of an Engineer's battalion. At one stage General Zia ordered his dismissal from the army as he was related to Bangabandhu's family. He was called to the DGFI headquarters for interrogation and cleared from the false allegation. As a Brigadier he was Defence Attaché' in Turkey from 1982-84. He commanded a Brigade in Comilla from 1986-89 and was promoted to the rank of Major General and commanded an Infantry Division in Jessore from 1992-95.

General Mustafiz was an outstanding, valiant freedom fighter, and a loyal and competent officer. So far no Chief of Army Staff (CAS) has come near to his caliber as far as his achievements -- professional, patriotic and academic -- are concerned.

Many developments in the army were achieved during Gen Mustafiz's tenure as CAS. A few of them are establishment of National Defence College (NDC), Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST), Armed Forces Medical College, Trust Bank Limited, Radisson Hotel, Central Mosque in Dhaka cantonment, Army Golf Course, introduction of lady officers in the army, etc.

When he was seriously ill he was denied medical treatment in CMH as well as abroad. A false case was instituted against him whilst he only forwarded a routine file to higher authority as Principal Staff Officer of Armed Forces Division, and it was shocking and inhuman that seriously ill Gen. Mustafiz was taken to dock on a stretcher. What a shame!

Gen Mustafiz had cancer of the pancreas and expired on August 3, 2008. He was buried in Army graveyard at Banani with full military honours and rituals.

The writer is a retired Major-General of Bangladesh Army.
