Kissinger secretly offered help to China against Soviets!
1999-01-10T00:00:43+06:00 | The Daily Star
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/kissinger-secretly-offered-help-to-china-against-soviets

WASHINGTON, Jan 9: Advising Chinese leaders that the Soviets were determined to amass enough nuclear weapons to destroy their country, Henry Kissinger secretly offered US satellite information and a hot line to China long before the communist government gained American diplomatic recognition, reports AP.

"We would be prepared, at your request, through whatever sources you wish, to give you whatever information we have about the disposition of Soviet forces," Kissinger told Huang Hua, the Chinese ambassador to the United Nations, in 1971.

The specific reference was to Soviet forces deployed during the war that year between India and Pakistan. But Kissinger offered a web of intelligence sharing in meetings with Chinese leaders including Chairman Mao Tse-tung and Premier Chou En-lai in November 1973.

"There are no secrets with (you about) the Soviet Union," Kissinger told Mao. "There is nothing we are doing with the Soviet Union that you do not know."

According to transcripts of top-secret talks Kissinger held as US national security adviser and as secretary of state under Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford in the 1970s, he played China against Russia with inventive triangular diplomacy.

The transcripts of secret conversations that may have changed history are being published by the National Security Archive of George Washington University, for release Sunday. These were obtained through freedom-of-information requests and other means, the private group said.

Kissinger's office said he was traveling and was not available for comment on the disclosures.

Interspersed in the documents are flashes of Kissinger's celebrated wit.

Chou told him, for instance, that China was giving only limited support to revolutions in Latin America, and "we are still learning." Kissinger quipped: "I hope you don't learn too fast."
