Modi skips Bangladesh in Victory Day message, Jaishankar extends greetings
2025-12-16T18:01:06+06:00 | Star Online Report
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/bangladesh/diplomacy/news/modi-skips-bangladesh-victory-day-message-jaishankar-extends

While remembering the sacrifices and bravery of Indian soldiers, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his remarks on Victory Day , has not mentioned Bangladesh.

"On Vijay Diwas [Victory Day], we remember the brave soldiers whose courage and sacrifice ensured India had a historic victory in 1971," he said on the social media platform X today as Bangladesh celebrates victory against Pakistan in the Liberation War.

Modi said the soldiers' steadfast resolve and selfless service protected "our nation" and etched a moment of pride in history.

Victory Day: Nation honours Liberation War martyrs

"This day stands as a salute to their valour and a reminder of their unmatched spirit. Their heroism continues to inspire generations of Indians," he said.

Modi also made similar remarks on Victory Day last year, when he did not mention Bangladesh.

Meanwhile, Indian Minister for External Affairs S Jaishankar greeted Bangladesh's Foreign Adviser Touhid Hossain and the people of Bangladesh on the occasion of Victory Day.

"Greetings to Foreign Affairs Adviser Mohammad Touhid Hossain, the Interim Government and the people of Bangladesh on Bijoy Dibosh," he posted on his X handle.

India-Bangladesh relations have remained strained since the ouster of the Awami League government on August 5 last year.

Subodh returns to Dhaka on Victory Day

Bangladesh foreign ministry wrote to India, seeking the extradition of deposed prime minister Sheikh Hasina -- once in December last year and in November this year after the International Crimes Tribunal handed a death sentence to her and former home minister Asaduzzaman Khan Kamal.

The Indian Ministry of External Affairs has stated that it will look into the matter.

S Jaishankar, in an interview, however, said that Sheikh Hasina went to India under certain circumstances, and it was up to her to make up her mind about returning to Bangladesh.
