Understanding genocide
2013-03-10T00:00:25+06:00 | Ashfaqur Rahman
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/understanding-genocide

It is acknowled-ged that genocide took place in 1971 at the time of the creation of Bangladesh. However, there are a miniscule few who are still not ready to agree after 41 years that it did take place. They think that it was political trouble between the Bengali majority and the ruling clique in Pakistan that led to unnecessary loss of lives. They also think that the number of persons killed or victimised is highly exaggerated. A thorough review of the figures quoted needs to be done in order to determine whether the events in 1971 could be termed as genocide.

One of the ways to determine this is to look at history and to compare the number of dead as well as those who were persecuted in various places around the world, and which had been characterised as genocide, and compare that with what happened in Bangladesh. Another way is to understand the nature and intent of the perpetrators of genocide and see whether one can recognise similar pattern of behaviour when genocide was committed in Bangladesh.

But before we do all that, it may be appropriate to understand what the word genocide means. In 1944, a Polish lawyer called Raphael Lemkin first coined this term. According to him, genocide is "the deliberate and systematic destruction in whole or part of an ethnic, racial, religious or national group."

The UN then crafted a Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (CPPCG). This international convention laid down certain acts which constitute genocide. Thus the killing of members of a group, or causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of this group, or even deliberately  inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or part, were genocide. It did not end there. Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group and forcibly transferring children of a group to another group was part of the act of genocide.

History is replete with instances of genocide. It is seen that wherever there are people who have something less common with another group, then the aliens are always defined as something less than human. The argument is put forward that "they should be eliminated in order that we may live."

In the first half of the First Millennium the very first genocide took place when Assyrians went for root and branch elimination of the conquered people. In the 5th century, when the Peloponnesian War was on, the Athenians destroyed Melos and committed genocide on the people of Melos. The Old Testament records the genocide of the Amalekites and the Midinites. In the 13th century the Mongols under Genghis Khan ran amok and killed entire nations.

In 1890, the then US military massacred Sioux Indians at Wounded Knee and started one of the first genocides in the American continent. They destroyed the aboriginal people in a "string of genocide campaigns" which became the most massive acts of genocide in history of the world. This genocide is also likened with that in Australia where the aboriginal population was brutally eliminated, and without any compunction. Genocide in course of time also occurred in German South West Africa (now Namibia) between 1904 and 1907. The Ottoman Turks, it is alleged, resorted to wiping out Armenians during their rule. But this is seriously challenged.

In modern times, one of the worst genocides was the killing of six million Jews in Europe by the German Nazis before and during the Second World War. This was a large-scale programme of extermination, planned and executed by the Nazi leader Adolf Hitler. Many call this genocide as "Holocaust" (meaning whole burnt).

In the post World War II period, Bangladesh saw one of the worst genocides take place in history. About 3 million Bengalis were killed and about three hundred thousand women were raped. Ten million people left their country temporarily and went to neighbouring India to escape the atrocities.

Rummel, a well known chronicler of genocide, narrates what took place in Bangladesh in his book Statistics of Domicide: Genocide and Mass murder since 1900. He says that "in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) General Mohammed Yahya Khan and his top generals planned to murder its Bengali intellectual, cultural and political elite."

They planned to indiscriminately eliminate hundreds of thousands of Hindus and drive the rest to India. They also planned to destroy the economic base to ensure that it would be subordinate to West Pakistan for at least a generation to come.

The Guinness Book of Records

lists it as one of the top five genocides in the 20th century.

There are now many studies on the genesis, nature and consequences of genocide. Some scholars have identified the various stages which events go through to ultimately qualify as genocide.

Genocide is usually a process. It develops in eight stages. At each stage preventive measures can stop it. The process is, however, not linear. Later stages can be preceded by earlier stages. But all stages continue to operate. The main features of each of the eight stages are:

1.    Classification:

This is when genocide planners distinguish people into "us and them;"

2.     Symbolisation:

They start to name people as "Jews" or "Gypsies" or "Bengalis." The victims are identified by the colour of their skin, dress or language;

3.    Dehumanisation:

Victims are equated with animals, diseases, vermin, etc;

4.    Organisation:

Genocide is organised by the state that also use militias. The organisation can be informal and it can be decentralised;

5.    Polarisation:

Hate groups incite polarisation and drive groups of population apart;

6.    Preparation:

Victims are identified and separated because of their ethnic identity. Death lists are drawn up;

7.    Extermination:

Mass killings start. The killers do not consider their victims as fully human;

8.    Denial:

This follows the genocide. It is an indicator of further genocidal

massacre

. The killers hide the evidence.

The right to express oneself, which is known as the freedom of speech, is considered a human right. Yet that freedom is used to incite violence and hatred. In February 1971 General Yayha, in order to eradicate the threat that he thought the Bengalis posed, said: "Kill three million of them and the rest will eat out of our hands" (Robert Payne, Massacre, 1972, Page 50). The genocide against the Bengalis proceeded in a classic fashion. The targets, according to Antony Mascarenhas, were (i) the Bengali military men and the para military; (ii) Hindus  (iii) office bearers of the Awami League; (iv) students; (v) Bengali intellectuals.

The then Pakistan government had three aims. First, the Bengalis have proved themselves unreliable. They must be ruled by West Pakistanis. Second, the Bengalis will have to be reeducated along proper Islamic lines. Third, when the Hindus have been eliminated their assets will be used to win over the underprivileged Muslim middle class. Thus this was a premeditated and engineered mass killing. The genocide that started on March 25, 1971 lasted for 267 days. The death toll, according to Rummel, was incredible. This was one regime which was more lethal than that of the Soviet Union, China or Japan under the military.

So when we try to compare genocide with unfortunate killings during political disturbances we are indeed challenging history.

The writer is a former Ambassador and a regular commentator on contemporary matters.

E-mail:

[email protected]
