On this days in '71, 600 people were killed at Nishbetganj
2013-03-28T00:50:55+06:00 | Mehedy Hasan, Rangpur
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/on-this-days-in-71-600-people-were-killed-at-nishbetganj

Memorial for martyrs at Nishbetganj on the outskirts of Rangpur city. On this day in 1971, Pakistani occupation forces massacred over 600 people in the area. Photo: Star

The people of Rangpur will observe the 43rd anniversary of 'Nishbetganj massacre day' today.

On this day in 1971, around 600 freedom-loving people sacrificed their lives at Nishbetganj on the outskirts of Rangpur city, while making a desperate attempt to free Rangpur Cantonment from the Pakistan occupation forces.

That day, thousands of freedom-loving people including Bangalees as well as Santals, Orangs and other ethnic peoples equipped with indigenous weapons like spears, cleavers, clubs, and bows and arrows started moving towards the cantonment, said Mosaddek Hossain Bablu, commander of Rangpur district unit of Muktijoddha Sangsad, and a few witnesses of the incident.

In the afternoon, thousands of people assembled at Nishbetganj before marching towards Rangpur cantonment with a vow to 'free' Rangpur Cantonment at any cost, said Majibar Rahman Master, a witnessed of the history, also an organiser of the programme in those turbulent days.

Awami League leader Sheikh Amjad Hossain presided over the meeting while late Soyer Uddin, a CPB leader, was a key organiser.

At that time Rangpur Cantonment headquartered Pakistan army's 23rd Brigade under the command of Brig Gen Abdullah Malik.

The freedom-loving people prepared to move towards the cantonment, hardly aware that it was not possible for them to break through the massive Pakistani forces equipped with modern arms like machine guns, artillery and tanks.

At one stage, Pakistan army men from 10 military jeeps started firing at the people with their machineguns. The shooting spree continued for about five minutes, killing over 600 people and injuring hundreds others.

Under the command of Pakistan army officer Col Sagir, most of the bodies of martyred Bangalees were burnt with petrol.

Later the bodies were put into the mass grave at Nishbetganj.

After the massacre, Col Sagir chastised Bangalee officers Major Nasir Uddin, Lt Bodiuzzaman and Lt Hashem, who were then stationed at Rangpur Cantonment, for not taking part in the military action against the Bangalees.

Later Col Sagir, who maintained communication with the local Biharis as accomplices of the Pakistan occupation force, boastfully said that he had taught a good lesson to the Bangalees for 'crossing all limits'.

Enraged by the March 28 massacre at Nishbetganj, the people of the region including Bangalee army personnel, members of the then East Pakistan Rifles, students, farmers and cross section of people joined the Liberation War to free the nation from the barbaric occupation forces.

And the country achieved the final victory against the Pakistan occupation forces on December 16 in 1971.

The people of Rangpur will today observe daylong programmes including placing of wreaths at Rakta Gaurab, the memorial built in honour of the Liberation War martyrs at Nishbetganj.
