Once valiant FF now hounded by Razakars
2013-04-30T00:27:47+06:00 | Our Correspondent, Jessore
https://www.thedailystar.net/news/once-valiant-ff-now-hounded-by-razakars

Once valiant FF now hounded by Razakars. Photo: Star

Local freedom fighters have demanded justice for brutal attack, threat and false case against a freedom fighter and his family members at Dohakhula village in Bagherpara upazila under the district.

Abdul Aziz, who bravely fought against Pakistani occupation forces and their collaborators during the Liberation War in 1971, had hoisted the national flag first in Bagherpara on December 8 that year.

But now at an advanced age, he is passing days amid utter insecurity as cohorts of a few alleged Rajakars (collaborators of the Pakistan occupation forces in 1971) injured him and his son, threatened the family and filed a false case against them.

"Recently some local BNP activists and supporters attacked the house of freedom fighter Jalil Uddin at Dohakhula village, following a clash between Chhatra League and Chhatra Dal at Bagherpara Degree College. As they started beating Jalil's grandson Jony, my son Rony protested and the attackers beat him too," Abdul Aziz said.

"Later on April 14, the criminals, also men of a few Rajakars of Dohakhula village, waylaid me when I was returning home. They beat me up indiscriminately with sticks and iron rods. I was rushed to Jessore Medical College Hospital with serious injuries," he said.

The freedom fighter filed a case in this regard on April 15 with Bagherpara police station but police could not arrest the culprits afterward.

"Meanwhile the accused took bail from the court on April 18. Now they are threatening me and my family members of dire consequences. The anti-liberation forces also filed a counter case against my two sons Nazmul Huda Mithu and Famid-bin-Aziz Rony, and relative freedom fighter Abdul Jalil's son Golam Dastagir and grandsons Jony and Joy to harass us," Aziz said.

Officer in charge of Bagherpara police station Ramprosad Bhakta said, "The accused have taken bail from the court and we are investigating the matter."

Demanding arrest and punishment of the culprits, Mazharul Islam Montu, commander of Jessore district unit of Muktijoddha Sangsad, said, "How sorrowful is it that anti-liberation forces torture a freedom fighter in an independent country."
